Multidecadal weakening of East India Coastal Current: Evidence from coastal
altimetry in Northern Indian Ocean.

Srinivasu Upparapalli1, Francis Pavanthara1
1

ESSO-Indian National Center for Ocean Information Services

Abstract
The East India Coastal Current (EICC) plays a crucial role in the coastal dynamics
of the Bay of Bengal, yet its long-term variability remains difficult to quantify due to
the limitations of traditional satellite altimetry near land. To overcome these
observational challenges, this study utilizes the high-resolution X-TRACK (L2P
v2.2) reprocessed along-track Sea Level Anomaly (SLA) dataset for the Northern
Indian Ocean. The X-TRACK algorithm significantly improves the recovery of valid
sea level observations in the coastal zone compared to standard products, enabling
a more accurate assessment of near-shore currents. By analyzing this combined
multi-mission altimetry record, the study identifies a multidecadal weakening trend
in the EICC. This long-term weakening is further evaluated in relation to regional
atmospheric forcing, specifically variations in wind stress magnitude over the Bay of
Bengal gyre and the equatorial band. Ultimately, the findings provide critical
observational evidence of long-term changes in boundary current dynamics in the
Northern Indian Ocean.

1. Introduction

Reliable estimation of coastal currents is of great importance owing to their utility in
several coastal services. Despite their importance, the in situ observations of
currents along the coast are sparse and model currents suffer limitations with
spatial resolution and boundary currents. Approximate geostrophic currents can be
estimated with traditional altimetry products, but these have several limitations,
especially on the coast. Most of the altimetry products are masked near coast due
to reasons like signal contamination by land, inland water reflections which affect
the shape of the reflected waveform. In addition to this, tides from global tidal
models are inaccurate near the coast and shelf regions and reference Mean Sea
Surface(MSS) is not accurate in the coastal regions due to lack of sufficiently long
data in the coastal regions. Atmospheric effects are not properly accounted for
while deducing sea level near the coast. The gridding procedure also smooths out
the variability near the coast.
Coastal Altimetry algorithms like XTRACK (Roblou, 2007) aims to address several
of the above challenges with various techniques. State of the art high resolution
regional models are used to better filter out tides and meteorologically induced
signals. Employing new waveform models for retracking of coastal waveforms
(ALES, i.e., Advanced Leading Edge Subwaveform retracker) (Passaro, 2014)
reduces the number of points rejected near the coast. Sophisticated vertical
reference frame with updated MSS and Screening multiple along track altimetry
data together are other techniques. Using these methods, many of the near coast
points can be retained which would otherwise be edited out.
Before the advent of coastal altimetry, coastal currents and sea level were studied
using regular satellite altimetry. Strub, 1997 for example, have examined the
dynamics of the California Current System using TOPEX altimetry derived surface
currents demonstrating the potential for studying large-scale circulations. One
major application of coastal altimetry is to study sea level variability very close to
the coast. One of the earliest studies using specialized coastal altimeter processing
(Vignudelli et al., 2005) have studied sea level variability in Corsica Channel. They
observed that open ocean tide gauge site Capraia has shown lesser sea level
RMSE in comparison to near coast tide gauge site Livorno. This could be due to
generally noisier radar reflections near the coast than in the open ocean.
Specifically in North Indian Ocean context, Durand, 2009 used newly re-processed
altimetry(MAP group) data of Topex/poseidon (T/P) to study the spatiotemporal
variations of the East India Coastal Current (EICC). They were able to look into the
cross shore structure of the EICC and showed the boundary trapped nature of
EICC extending up to 150-200km. Dohan and Maximenko (2010) highlight the

importance of satellite altimetry and ocean vector winds for monitoring geostrophic
and Ekman currents, providing insights into surface current dynamics at various
scales.
Reprocessed coastal sea level data has been used to study several regional
coastal circulations (Le Hénaff, 2011; Liu, 2012). While assessing the performance
of XTRACK altimetry derived currents in the West Florida Shelf (Liu et al., 2012)
have found that Ekman corrected geostrophic currents improve RMSE when
compared with ADCP and HF radar observations.
Jebri, 2016 have shown that close to the coast in Mediterranean Sea, higher
variability (in terms of standard deviation) is observed in XTRACK SLA compared to
AVISO along-track SLA. They have also shown that XTRACK derived cross-track
geostrophic currents are in better agreement with nearby ADCP than with AVISO
derived currents. The analysis over South Atlantic Bight (Yuan, 2017) highlights the
significant contribution of wind-driven Ekman dynamics to along-shelf transport,
especially during seasons when wind is strong.
Since the above studies, several new developments have happened in coastal
altimetry. X-TRACK v.2.7.12 version has updated Mean Dynamic Topography
estimated from a combination of altimetry, gravimetry (GRACE and GOCE) and insitu data, updated tides based on FES2014b model. A full description of the
XTRACK algorithm can be found in (Birol et al., 2017). Very recently, Cazenave et
al., 2022 demonstrated that reprocessed satellite altimetry data can be used to
accurately capture coastal sea level trends within 20km of the shoreline. Their
analysis indicates that coastal altimetry data can be used as virtual tide gauge
stations to monitor coastal sea level rise across the globe including North Indian
Ocean.
However, earlier coastal altimetry studies in the region, such as Durand et al.
(2009), largely considered Ekman components to be negligible, focusing primarily
on the geostrophic flow. To accurately capture the total surface current variability,
especially in a monsoon-dominated regime like the Bay of Bengal where wind
forcing is highly seasonal and intense, the integration of Ekman velocities with
geostrophic currents is essential (Sudre et al., 2013).
Furthermore, while the intraseasonal and seasonal variability of the East India
Coastal Current (EICC) has been extensively documented through hydrographic
surveys, short-term mooring deployments (Mukherjee et al., 2014; Amol et al.,
2014), and numerical modeling (McCreary et al., 1996; Shankar et al., 1996), its
multidecadal evolution remains poorly understood.
Standard gridded altimetry products systematically fail to resolve this narrow,
boundary-trapped flow over the continental slope. This observational gap is
particularly concerning given the rapid and asymmetric warming of the Indian

Ocean, which has been shown to dampen overall monsoonal wind circulation and
alter large-scale atmospheric patterns (Roxy et al., 2015; Schott et al., 2009).
Consequently, there is a critical need to assess how boundary currents like the
EICC are responding to sustained atmospheric and thermodynamic shifts over the
basin.
To bridge this gap, this study leverages a reprocessed, multi-mission coastal
altimetry dataset (X-TRACK) spanning over three decades, explicitly combined with
Ekman transport estimates, to provide a comprehensive analysis of the EICC right
up to the continental slope. By applying specialized coastal processing algorithms,
the X-TRACK dataset recovers significantly more valid sea level anomaly (SLA)
observations near the coast compared to standard Level-2 products (Figure 1),
enabling the continuous observation of near-shore dynamics. With some missions
(see Sup Fig 1) of XTRACK product spanning more than three decades at 10 days
resolution, the dataset offers an unprecedented opportunity to study long term
changes in the coastal sea level and currents in the Indian Ocean.
Our objective is twofold: first, to evaluate the performance of the XTRACK coastal
altimeter product in the Northern Indian Ocean, by comparing XTRACK-derived
geostrophic current components with data from HF radar, RAMA, OMNI buoys and
drifter buoys. Special emphasis is given to estimate the effect of Ekman correction
on the total velocity estimation in the nearshore regions and second, to investigate
a sustained multidecadal weakening of the EICC. We explore the dynamic links
between this weakening boundary current and the basin-wide relaxation of its
primary drivers namely, local alongshore winds and remote equatorial wind stress,
which modulate the propagation of coastal Kelvin waves.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 details the multimission satellite altimetry data, wind products, and the methodology used to
compute the total surface currents. Section 3 presents the validation of the
altimetry-derived currents against in situ observations. Section 4 examines the
multidecadal variability of the EICC and characterizes the dynamic response to
shifting regional wind forcing.
2. Data and Methods
The along-track Sea Level Anomaly (SLA) data processed with XTRACK (L2P
v2.2) are grouped by regions and satellite missions that have similar orbital paths.
For the current study, data for the northern Indian region (labeled as NINDIAN
which covers 42E:99E, 0:25N) was downloaded from the ftp site ftpaccess.aviso.altimetry.fr distributed by Center de Topographie des Océans et de
l′Hydrosphére (CTOH). Supplemental Figure 1a shows the multi-mission reference
tracks, their temporal and spatial resolution, total number of tracks (and their
intersection points over the basin) available for the region NINDIAN. The horizontal

extent of the bars indicates the temporal coverage of the satellite missions. The
temporal resolution ranges from 10 days for TOPEX/Poseidon (T/P) and Jason
satellites to about one month for Sentinel-3A, ERS, Envisat and Saral combination.
The along-track data has a spatial resolution of 6-7km corresponding to 1Hz
sampling. The multi-mission references tracks also have varying levels of data
availability (Sup Figure 1b). Missions S3A, TP+J1+J2+J3+S6A and S3B have the
best
overall
data
availability
followed
by
HY2A,
GFO
and
ERS1+ERS2+ENV+SRL.The multi-mission reference track TPN+J1N+J2N+J3N
has both poor data availability and least number of intersection points covering the
region.
To evaluate the computed geostrophic currents in the open ocean surface current
data of RAMA buoys available at https://www.pmel.noaa.gov/tao/drupal/disdel/ and
OMNI buoy current data has been used. To compute region averaged
winstress(and curl) and Ekman velocity component, Cross Calibrated Multi-Platform
(CCMP) v3.1 wind data available on 0.25o spatial grid has been used. This dataset
is available at www.remss.com with DOI of https://doi.org/10.56236/RSS-uv6h30.
Near shore currents are validated with the HF radar data from three locations Tamil
Nadu (TN), Andhra Pradesh (AP) and Odisha (OR) on the east coast of India.
These radar stations are operated and maintained by NIOT as part of Indian
Coastal Ocean Radar Network (ICORN). Drifter buoy data from the Global Drifter
Program (GDP) of the NOAA Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological
Laboratory (AOML) has been used to further verify the robustness of computed
geostrophic currents especially in the coastal regions. The data can be found at
https://www.aoml.noaa.gov/ftp/pub/phod/buoydata/6h/. The dataset which maps the
distance to the nearest coast is used to estimate proximity of observations to the
coast. This dataset is available as part of Generic Mapping Tools (GMT) which is
available at https://oceancolor.gsfc.nasa.gov/resources/docs/distfromcoast/.
To evaluate the performance and added value of the X-TRACK coastal altimetry
product, standard along-track Level-2+ (L2P) Sea Level Anomaly (SLA) data
distributed by AVISO+/CNES were utilized as a baseline for comparison. The L2P
dataset provides global, 1-Hz along-track SLA time series derived from standard
Level-2 instrumental measurements. In this standard product, SLAs are computed
using state-of-the-art environmental and geophysical corrections (including wet/dry
tropospheric, ionospheric, tidal, and dynamic atmospheric corrections) optimized
primarily for the open ocean.
While highly accurate in the open ocean, standard L2P processing applies rigorous
data-editing criteria that frequently flag and discard measurements near the coast.
In this study, the standard deviation of SLA from the conventional L2P product was
compared with that of the X-TRACK product as a function of distance from the
coast. Because the X-TRACK processing chain uses the L2P dataset as its primary

input but applies specialized, coastal-oriented spatial filtering and editing strategies,
comparing the two directly isolates the ability of the X-TRACK algorithm to recover
valid, high-resolution physical variability in the near-shore region that would
otherwise be lost or smoothed out in the standard L2P product.
In the XTRACK data product, the satellite ground tracks data were arranged with
their first index falling on equator and last index falling on the coast. Variables such
as SLA and Dynamic Atmospheric Correction (DAC), among others, are functions
of points_numbers (spatial sampling points) and cycles_numbers(temporal). To
better manipulate and visualize the data, the variables are reshaped as a function
of distance (s) from the coast and time. The distance (s) is the along-track distance
between coastal point and track points on an ellipsoidal model of earth computed
based on geodesic algorithms(Karney, 2013). Raw data can give large gradients
upon differentiation along track and then give unrealistic currents. Proper
smoothing is needed to derive reliable currents.
An exercise has been done to compare the performances of various filters, namely,
Gaussian with sigma levels of 3 and 6, box smoothing with window lengths of 6 and
12, optimal difference operator(Powell and Leben, 2004) and loess filtering in
properly estimating the geostrophic current components at the track intersection
points. Among the tested smoothing techniques, the along-track smooth by loess
filter (Cleveland 1979) with 0.05 fraction of regional points for the regression is
found to be best for estimating geostrophic currents. This filter gives an RMSE of
0.133m/s and correlation of 0.66 for computed geostrophic zonal currents against
AVISO msla currents(extracted at intersection points) along the time axis. Optimal
difference operator is second best with correlation, RMSE pair of 0.65 and 0.135.
These are followed by other techniques. Hence, each track is smoothed using a
loess filter with a fraction of 0.05 of data selected at each point for local regression.
Meridional currents are poorly resolved with correlations <0.4 even with best
smoothing filters. This is because all tracks make small acute angles with the north
meridian at the intersection points. Hence most of the analysis is limited to well
resolved zonal component of the current. Since geostrophic currents are undefined
at equator, tracks within the band 5S-5N are trimmed. Differentiation along the track
gives geostrophic current that is normal to the path of the track. The cross-track
geostrophic current(gc) is calculated as follows,
gc=

−g ∂h
f ∂s

where s is the distance from coast which serves as along track dimension, h is the
sea level anomaly, g is the acceleration due to gravity and f is the Coriolis
parameter. For more precision, g is computed as a function of latitude.

To be able to resolve zonal and meridional components of the current vector, we
need two cross-track geostrophic currents. This is only possible at the intersection
points of ascending and descending tracks. Cross-track geostrophic currents (gc1
and gc2) for each track at the intersection points are computed. These are
expressed as the linear combination of components of the current vector (Parke et
al., 1987).
gc 1=− usin ( α 1 ) +vcos ( α 1 )
gc 2=− usin ( α 2 ) +vcos ( α 2 )

Here α1 and α2 are the heading angles (counter clockwise to the positive x-axis) of
the intersecting tracks. We can deduce current vector components as follows.
gc 1 cos α 2 − gc 2 cos α 1
sin ( α 2 − α 1 )
gc sin α 1 − gc 1 sin α 2
v= 2
sin ( α 2 − α 1 )

u=

To estimate the wind-driven Ekman current components, daily 10-meter wind
velocity fields (u10 , v 10) were obtained from the Cross-Calibrated Multi-Platform
(CCMP) version 3.1 dataset. The surface wind stress vector ( τ x , τ y ) was first
calculated using the bulk aerodynamic parametrization:
τ x = ρ a i r C d W u10
τ y = ρ a i r C d W v 10
2
2
+v 10
where W is the wind speed magnitude ( √ u10
), ρ a i r =1.225 kg m

−3

is the density of

−3

air, and C d =1.5 × 10 is the dimensionless drag coefficient. The kinematic wind
stress components (~τ x , ~τ y ) were subsequently obtained by dividing the wind stress
−3
by the reference density of seawater ( ρ w a t e r =1025.0 kg m ). Following classical
Ekman theory (Vallis, 2006), the depth-dependent Ekman velocity components (
u E ( z ) , v E ( z )) were computed using the analytical solutions for a wind-driven surface
boundary layer in a homogeneous ocean of infinite depth. The equations governing
the horizontal Ekman spiral are given by:

[ ( )
[ ( )

( d 4 ))

u E ( z )=

√ 2 e z / d ~τ cos z − π − ~τ sin z − π

v E ( z )=

√ 2 e z / d ~τ sin z − π + ~τ cos z − π

fd

fd

x

x

d

d

4

4

y

y

( d 4 ))

where z is the depth (defined as negative downwards, with z=0 at the surface),
f =2 Ω sin ( θ ) is the Coriolis parameter at latitude θ , and d is the Ekman layer depth.
The Ekman depth is defined as:

d=

√

2A
|f )

where A represents the vertical eddy viscosity parameter, which was set to a
constant value of 0.1 m 2 s−1. Because the Coriolis parameter approaches zero at the
equator, causing singularities in the Ekman depth and velocity calculations, the
computations were masked out for the equatorial band between 5°S and 5°N.
The momentum transferred from the wind to the ocean surface is highly sensitive to
wind speed due to varying surface roughness. Following the piecewise formulation
utilized by Wang et al. (2023), which builds upon the foundational bulk
parameterizations of Large and Pond (1981), the dimensionless drag coefficient ( C d
) was parameterized as a function of the 10-meter wind speed magnitude (W ):

{

( 0.62+1.56 /W ) × 10− 3 if W <3.0 m s−1
−3
−1
Cd=
1.14 × 10
if 3.0 ≤ W ≤ 10.0 m s
( 0.49+0.065 W ) × 10− 3 if W >10.0 m s−1

)

Similarly, the assumption of a constant vertical eddy viscosity ( A=0.1 m 2 s−1) limits
the model’s ability to accurately capture the depth of the Ekman layer, which
deepens under stronger wind forcing due to enhanced turbulent mixing. To address
this, a dynamic, wind-dependent eddy viscosity was implemented. Adapting the
relationships established by Santiago-Mandujano and Firing (1990) and
subsequently validated in the context of global ocean surface current products
(OSCAR) by Johnson et al. (2007), A is defined dynamically as:
A=

{

a
if W <1.0 m s−1
a W b if W ≥ 1.0 m s−1

)

where the empirical constants are set to a=8 × 10−5 and b=2.2.The incorporation of
these dynamic variables allows the Ekman layer depth ( d= √ 2 A /|f )) to adjust
realistically to local atmospheric conditions.
RAMA, OMNI and radar daily currents are smoothed with a 72 hour low pass
butterworth filter (4th order) to retain only sub-inertial currents. The 6 hourly drifter
buoy data is averaged to daily and smoothed over a 3 day running window.
Intersection points of tracks don’t usually fall on the points of observation to
compare with. So, for each point observation we want to compare with, nearby
intersection points are searched. Only those combinations of tracks and
observations with less than a minimum threshold (0.5o) of distance are selected for
comparison.
3. Results
The efficacy of the coastal-dedicated X-TRACK processing algorithm against
standard AVISO Level-2+ (L2P) products is demonstrated in Fig 1. Figure 1a

illustrates the spatial distribution of 12 selected Sentinel-3A (S3A) satellite ground
tracks over the Bay of Bengal. Historically, standard satellite altimetry has exhibited
significant limitations in the coastal zone typically within 50 km of the shoreline.
These limitations primarily stem from the contamination of the radar footprint by
landmasses, inaccurate coastal tidal models, and degraded wet tropospheric
corrections, which collectively corrupt the returning waveform and subsequent SLA
estimates (Bouffard et al., 2010; Benveniste et al., 2020).
Standard processing protocols often result in a severe loss of data near the coast
due to strict editing criteria that flag land-contaminated observations as invalid.
Figure 1b shows the percentage of valid SLA observations recovered by both
products. While the availability of standard L2P data drops precipitously as the
satellite ground track approaches the coast, X-TRACK recovers a substantially
higher percentage of valid points right up to the shoreline. By recovering these
near-shore observations without amplifying the noise, X-TRACK effectively bridges
the observational gap between the open ocean and the coastal domain. This
recovery is critical for resolving narrow, coastal-trapped boundary currents such as
the East India Coastal Current (EICC), which often occupy the heavily masked 0–
50 km coastal band (Durand et al., 2009). Figure 1c illustrates the temporal
standard deviation (STD) of the SLA as a function of distance from the coast. In the
standard L2P product, the SLA variance increases sharply near the coastline. It can
be seen that the XTRACK-processed data retains higher SLA variability near the
coast (within the first 50 km) compared to the standard L2P product. Beyond
approximately 150 km offshore, the standard deviations of both products converge.
This improvement aligns with previous regional studies (e.g., Roblou et al., 2010;
Jebri et al., 2016), which demonstrated that applying tailored along-track editing
criteria and improved high-resolution geophysical corrections substantially reduces
non-physical variance in coastal sea level time series.
3.1 Open ocean validations with RAMA/OMNI
Following the computation of the geostrophic and Ekman velocity components at
the intersection points, it is crucial to validate the combined surface current
estimates against independent in situ observations to test robustness of
geostrophic current computation and other processing methods involved. For this
purpose, we first utilized open-ocean near-surface current measurements from the
OMNI(and RAMA) buoy network in the Bay of Bengal(BoB) and Arabian Sea(AS).
Because of the temporal gaps in OMNI data and altimetry data, having a complete
timeseries of overlapping periods is hard to find. Figure 2a illustrates one such
spatial configuration used for the comparison. The black marker denotes the
intersection point of two Sentinel-3A (S3A) satellite tracks (tracks 522 and 279),
while the red marker indicates the location of the nearby OMNI buoy (BD10).
Although the buoy is situated approximately half a degree away from the exact

track intersection, this separation is well within the typical mesoscale decorrelation
scales of the region, making it a highly suitable proxy for validating the altimetryderived currents. The OMNI daily zonal data is selected at the timestamps of S3A
mission which has a temporal resolution of 27 days (Supplemental Fig 1a). Figure
2b presents the corresponding time series of the zonal current component (gu), its
Ekman correction and its validation against the buoy data. The in situ zonal current
measured by the OMNI buoy (red line) serves as the reference. When comparing
the purely geostrophic zonal current derived from the along-track altimetry (black
line) to the buoy data, the altimetry captures the lower-frequency seasonal
reversals. To account for the direct wind-driven circulation, the Ekman component
was added to the geostrophic flow. As shown by the blue line (geostrophic +
Ekman), the inclusion of the Ekman component noticeably improves the agreement
with the OMNI buoy observations. The Ekman-corrected timeseries better captures
the peak magnitudes (Jul-2019, Aug-2021, Aug-2022) and the higher-frequency
variability of the true surface flow. This aligns with the fundamental oceanographic
consensus that near-surface buoy measurements represent the total flow
(geostrophic plus ageostrophic Ekman currents). Similar improvements in
correlation and Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) upon adding the Ekman
component have been extensively documented in previous coastal altimetry
studies. For instance, Liu et al. (2012) and Saraceno et al. (2008) demonstrated
that Ekman-corrected geostrophic currents yield significantly better statistical
agreements with moored ADCPs and HF radar observations over continental
shelves. Furthermore, global-scale studies by Sudre et al. (2013) and Rio et al.
(2014) highlight that capturing the synergistic effect of both components is strictly
necessary to accurately retrieve surface layer kinematics. Finally, the time series
also includes the zonal current derived from the standard AVISO gridded mapped
sea level anomalies (MSLA) at the same intersection point (cyan line). This
timeseries closely follows that of track derived geostrophic velocity as is expected
in the open ocean. Compared to the along-track altimetry estimates, the AVISO
currents exhibit a heavily smoothed temporal profile, failing to capture the sharp,
mesoscale peaks recorded by the buoy. This dampening effect is a well-known
artifact of the spatial and temporal interpolation schemes used to create gridded
altimetry products, which tend to smooth out energetic, small-scale coastal and
shelf dynamics (Jebri et al., 2016; Bouffard et al., 2010). Consequently, the alongtrack formulation combined with the local Ekman correction provides a much more
faithful representation of the true surface circulation in this region. At this
intersection point, raw track derived geostrophic current gives a correlation of 0.66
against the OMNI, while Ekman corrected timeseries gives a correlation of 0.72.
Building upon the single-point time-series analysis, a comprehensive statistical
validation was conducted across the broader Bay of Bengal and Arabian Sea
regions in Indian Ocean to robustly quantify the performance of the altimetry-

derived currents. For this basin-scale assessment, co-located measurements from
the extensive network of RAMA (Research Moored Array for African-AsianAustralian Monsoon Analysis and Prediction) and OMNI buoys were utilized. As
discussed in the data and methods section, zonal and meridional current
components can only be resolved at the intersection of reference tracks. Each
observation point is surrounded by at least 4 close intersection points (forming the
vertices of a diamond shape). The observational timeseries is matched with the
geostrophic timeseries of several nearby intersection points after masking the
invalid values. This facilitates the estimation of robust comparison metrics between
altimetry derived currents and observational currents. Intersection points that are
farther than 50km from the observational point are omitted while computing the
metrics.
Figure 3 presents density scatter plots comparing the altimetry-derived zonal
surface currents against the in situ buoy measurements. To evaluate the specific
contribution of wind-driven dynamics, the comparisons are separated into purely
geostrophic currents and total currents (geostrophic plus Ekman). Panels (a) and
(c) illustrate the comparison using only the purely geostrophic zonal component ( u g)
derived from the satellite tracks against the RAMA and OMNI buoys, respectively.
While the highest density of points clusters along the theoretical perfect fit (white
dashed line), the linear regression (red line) reveals an underestimation of the
current magnitudes, and the scatter exhibits considerable spread. Panels (b) and
(d) display the same comparisons after the zonal veloctity estimates have been
corrected by adding the locally derived zonal Ekman velocity component ( u g +u E).
The inclusion of the ageostrophic Ekman flow yields a clear statistical improvement
across both buoy networks:
RAMA Buoys: The number of points available for comparison is quite low (only 205)
since all of the equatorial RAMA buoys are omitted (because geostrophy breaks
here) with only five buoys remaining for comparison. The wider scatter reflects the
inherent challenges of coastal altimetry and the presence of significant
ageostrophic processes. The addition of the Ekman component however shifts the
linear fit noticeably closer to the 1:1 reference line. The overall correlation (R)
improves significantly (from 0.48 to 0.66), and the scatter tightens, reflecting the
strong wind-driven dynamics in this region. The standard error has also reduced.
Further differences can be accounted for the fact that RAMA bouys’ velocities are
at 10m and track derived current are surface and almost all the intersection points
considered don’t fall exactly on the RAMA locations.
OMNI Buoys: OMNI buoy network is situated in the interior of the Bay of Bengal
and Arabian Sea. Because OMNI buoys are clustered north of 5N, there are so
many spatial and temporal matches with altimetry timeseries. This provided the
bulk of points (1148) for the comparison. The high density of points near the origin

indicates that the background state is well-captured, while the tighter clustering
along the regression line confirms the high fidelity of the altimeter in these regions.
A similar significant improvement is observed for the OMNI network with the
addition of Ekman components. The correlation increases (from 0.51 to 0.58), and
the standard error is reduced. Across both buoy networks, the integration of the
wind-driven Ekman component consistently enhances the accuracy of the satellitederived surface currents. While Ekman correction failed to reduce RMSE
significantly, an additional 7% variance is explained by addition of Ekman drifts.
These statistical improvements align directly with classical physical oceanography
principles; near-surface in situ instruments (such as buoys drogued at 10–15 m
depth) inherently measure the total kinematic flow, comprising both the pressuregradient-driven geostrophic currents and the direct wind-driven Ekman drift. On a
global scale, studies by Sudre et al. (2013) and Rio et al. (2014) demonstrated that
synergistic surface current products combining altimetry with an empirical Ekman
model consistently outperform purely geostrophic estimates when validated against
Lagrangian drifters and moored Acoustic Doppler Current Profilers (ADCPs). In the
context of tropical and equatorial dynamics, Lagerloef et al. (1999) showed that
incorporating the Ekman component is strictly necessary to resolve the total
velocity variance observed by buoys. Furthermore, regional coastal altimetry
assessments, such as those by Liu et al. (2012) on the West Florida Shelf, have
consistently reported measurable reductions in Root Mean Square Error (RMSE)
and improved correlation coefficients once the wind-driven Ekman velocities are
superimposed onto the along-track geostrophic anomalies.
3.2a Near shore validations with Lagrangian drifters
While there are plenty of observations in the open ocean, there is a dearth of
velocity observations very close to the coast in the Indian Ocean to make valid
comparisons. The velocity data from the ADCP moorings available on the shelf and
slope of the east and west coast of India are not valid above 48m (Amol et al 2012,
2014, Mukherjee et al 2014). To further extend validation into the dynamic nearshore domain, we resorted to Lagrangian surface drifters. Drifters provide an
excellent source of continuous, high-resolution independent velocity
measurements, particularly in regions where moored arrays are sparse. For this
assessment, we utilized quality-controlled drifter trajectories that intersected the
satellite tracks within a 100 km coastal band. Hundreds of drifter buoys pass close
to the Indian coast whose time periods might overlap with the time period of the
satellite missions. The spatial and temporal collocation process is done in three
steps. First drifter tracks that don’t have any overlapping time period with that of the
satellite mission are omitted. Then at each intersection point, a small square box of
one degree width is formed and it is checked, at each drifter track if any part of it
passes through the box. If so, it is added to the candidate list for further processing.

The index of the closest point of the drifter track to the intersection point is
computed by least square distance. This index is then used to retrieve the time
stamp and zonal velocity of the drifter track. gu timeseries is interpolated at the time
stamp to get the collocated track zonal velocity. We have chosen the multi-mission
reference orbit TPN+J1N+J2N+J3N for this exercise since it has very temporal
coverage and 10day temporal resolution, so tolerance of interpolation won’t be
greater than five days. To focus specifically on the coastal regime, of all the
collocated points, only the points that are within 100km distance from the coast are
considered for evaluation.
Figure 4 illustrates the density scatter plots comparing the zonal velocity
components from the drifter observations against the collocated altimetry-derived
estimates for the multi-mission reference orbit (TP+J1+J2+J3+S6A). a) shows the
scatter plot comparing the in situ drifter zonal velocities (y-axis) against the purely
geostrophic zonal currents derived from the along-track sea level anomalies (xaxis). The color bar indicates the point density, revealing that while the highest
concentration of measurements clusters along the 1:1 perfect fit reference (white
dashed line), there is considerable spread. The linear regression fit (red line)
indicates a general underestimation of the current magnitudes by the purely
geostrophic altimetry, yielding a baseline correlation and standard error typical of
uncorrected satellite estimates in high-variability coastal regions. b) displays the
same comparison after the altimetry-derived geostrophic velocities have been
corrected by superimposing the locally derived Ekman zonal velocities u g +u E . The
inclusion of the direct wind-driven component yields a clear statistical improvement.
The dense cluster of scatter points aligns much more closely with the 1:1 reference
line, the overall correlation increases (from 0.66 to 0.72) and the standard error is
visibly reduced (as detailed in the upper left-hand statistics boxes). There is also a
modest reduction of RMSE from 0.36m/s(before Ekman correction) to 0.34m/s after
correction. Geostrophic current alone explains 48% (R2 in percentage) and
Geostrophic current+Ekman component together explains 56% of total drifter
velocity variance. This indicates an additional 8% variance is explained by Ekman
component alone in the coastal regions(<100km). It can be noticed that this
correlation is better than that of the open ocean. This can be due to the richer
spatial temporal availability of drifter data, whereas in open ocean observations are
few and fixed. These correlations are similar in magnitude to the geostrophic drifter
velocities(after removing the Ekman component) versus altimetry velocities (Niiler
et al. 2003). Consistent with the moored buoy validations, the drifter comparisons
confirm that near-shore altimetry products successfully capture the large-scale
coastal velocity variance.
In the context of boundary currents and coastal regimes, studies by Bouffard et al.
(2010) and Liu et al. (2012) have highlighted that coastal altimetry (such as X-

TRACK) can accurately resolve near-shore geostrophic flow, but optimal
agreement with in situ data (whether from ADCPs, HF radars, or drifters) is only
achieved when the wind-driven Ekman velocities are appropriately quantified and
added to the signal. Furthermore, Lagerloef et al. (1999) noted that in tropical
regimes, incorporating Ekman components is critical for capturing the full variance
of drifter velocities. Our results along the Indian coast perfectly mirror these
conclusions, demonstrating that the synergistic combination of high-resolution
coastal altimetry and Ekman dynamics provides a robust representation of the
near-shore circulation.

3.2b Near shore validations with radar
Following the Lagrangian validation using surface drifters, we extend our analysis
to an Eulerian framework to evaluate the cross-shelf structure of the East India
Coastal Current (EICC). While drifters provide excellent ground truth for tracking
water parcels, High-Frequency (HF) radar networks offer a unique advantage by
resolving the continuous spatiotemporal evolution of surface currents near the
coast. The three radar regions situated in the region have varying temporal
variability. Among the three radar regions studied, TN shows better data availability
for much of the region. AP radar region shows lowest data availability with less than
50 percent temporal coverage for the whole region. Peripheral regions away from
the radar transmitter and receiver locations witness poor data availability for all
three regions.
Ekman corrected along-track geostrophic cross-track currents are compared with
rotated (in the cross track direction) radar fields extracted along the traversing
tracks. Fig 5a shows one such example of traversing track (track number 165 of
S3A mission) through OR radar region. Because this descending satellite track is
oriented approximately orthogonal to the coastline, the cross-track velocity
component serves as an excellent proxy for the along-shelf flow of the EICC.
The time–distance Hovmöller diagrams present the evolution of the along-shelf
currents as captured by both the corrected altimetry (Figure 5b) and the HF radar
(Figure 5c). b) and c) time versus distance plots of Ekman corrected cross track
geostrophic current and radar field extracted along this track. A quantitative
assessment of this agreement is detailed in Figure 5d, which illustrates the skill
metrics (correlation and Root Mean Square Error, RMSE) as a function of offshore
distance (x). The visual agreement between the u g +u E structure and the radarderived velocities is striking. Both datasets successfully capture the pronounced
seasonal reversals characteristic of the EICC, transitioning from strong poleward
flow in the spring to equatorward flow during the winter monsoon. This robust

seasonality aligns with the acoustic Doppler current profiler (ADCP) observations of
the EICC documented by Mukherjee et al. (2014) and the broader boundary current
structure modeled by Durand et al. (2009).

Ekman correction has improved noticeably both the correlation and RMSE all
across the region. But the overall reduction in RMSE across all transects and all
radar regions is negligible (stayed at 0.3m/s). Improvement in correlation is also
modest (0.55 mean correlation changed to 0.60). Mean correlations across all
traversing tracks is better for regions AP and OR than with TN although TN has
better temporal data coverage for most of its region. In radar regions, Ekman
correction can only explain an additional variance of 4%. This modest improvement
in correlation close to the coast was also noticed in drifter comparisons. However
radar metrics are for rotated (in the direction of gc) currents, not for zonal currents,
so these are not directly comparable.
4. EICC strength along the coast
The East India Coastal Current (EICC) is a western boundary current of the Bay of
Bengal. Its features include seasonal reversals driven by monsoon winds and
complex spatiotemporal variability (Durand et al., 2009, Shankar 1994, 1996). Flow
is dominated by seasonal cycle while intra-seasonal and inter annual variations are
highly discontinuous. It flows northward during March to May and reverses
southward from September to November. The boundary current is confined within
200km of the east coast of India.
Building upon the robust validation of the Ekman-corrected coastal altimetry
currents against independent near-shore radar and drifter observations, we
leverage this enhanced dataset to investigate long-term coastal circulation
dynamics. Coastal boundary regions historically suffer from a severe scarcity of
sustained, multi-decadal in situ current measurements, limiting our understanding
of long-term climatic shifts. To address this, we utilize the extensive temporal (from
1992 to 2016) and spatial coverage (788 intersection points, see Sup Fig 1) of the
multi-mission reference orbit (comprising ERS-1/2, Envisat, and SARAL/AltiKa) to
assess the multidecadal variability of the East India Coastal Current (EICC). Figure
6 illustrates the spatial framework and the resulting long-term timeseries analysis of
the EICC's strength. As shown in the left panel, we selected seven altimetry
crossover points (labeled A through G, spanning from south to north between 10 oN
and 22oN) strategically located over the continental slope along the eastern
boundary of the Bay of Bengal, primarily bracketed by the 200 m and 1000 m
isobaths. Although there are several points on the shelf region very close to the
coast, we made sure not to include them since seasonally reversing EICC is absent
on the shelf region (Biswmoy 2021). At each of these intersection points, the total
surface current speed was computed from the combined geostrophic and Ekman

velocity components. To isolate the long-term multidecadal signal from the highly
energetic seasonal monsoonal reversals and interannual perturbations (such as El
Niño–Southern Oscillation and Indian Ocean Dipole events), a 500-day low-pass
Butterworth filter was applied to the current speed time series. The right panel of
Figure 6 presents these low-pass filtered time series alongside their linear trend fits
(black dashed lines). The data reveal a pronounced and statistically significant
multidecadal weakening of the EICC's strength over the nearly three-decade
observation period. The linear trends are predominantly negative across the basin's
boundary. Points E, F show the smallest weakening trend while A, B, D points show
the strongest trend. As annotated on the spatial map, the reductions in current
speed are substantial, reaching up to -0.0223 m s -1 yr-1 in the southern segment
(Point B), with statistically significant weakening extending northward along the
coast. This accounts to 55% weakening in the strength of EICC over the last three
decades at this point. Averaged across all the points, a 30% weakening of the EICC
strength is noticed. While there is considerable decadal variability superimposed on
these records, the overall trajectory points toward a systematic deceleration of the
boundary current. The significance of this multidecadal weakening within the
context of our study is twofold. First, it demonstrates the unique capability of the
reprocessed, Ekman-corrected coastal altimetry dataset to capture low-frequency,
long-term climate signals right up to the continental slope, a domain where
standard gridded altimetry products traditionally fail. Second, it highlights a critical
shift in the physical oceanography of the Bay of Bengal. The EICC is a complex
western boundary current primarily driven by a combination of local alongshore
wind stress, interior Ekman pumping over the Bay of Bengal, and remote equatorial
forcing transmitted via coastal Kelvin waves (McCreary et al., 1996; Shankar et al.,
1996). A sustained multidecadal weakening suggests a fundamental alteration in
one or more of these driving mechanisms.
Driving Mechanisms of the Multidecadal EICC Weakening:
Having identified a robust multidecadal deceleration in the strength of the East India
Coastal Current (EICC), it is imperative to investigate the large-scale forcing
mechanisms responsible for this trend. The EICC is a dynamically complex
boundary current; analytical and numerical modeling studies (e.g., McCreary et al.,
1996; Shankar et al., 1996) have established that its seasonal and low-frequency
variability is not solely locally driven. Instead, it is governed by a combination of
three primary forcings: (1) interior Ekman pumping over the Bay of Bengal, which
generates westward-propagating baroclinic Rossby waves; (2) local alongshore
wind stress along the east coast of India; and (3) remote equatorial Indian Ocean
wind stress, which excites equatorial Kelvin waves that impinge on the eastern
boundary and reflect as coastal trapped Kelvin waves propagating up the perimeter
of the Bay. To determine which of these mechanisms is driving the observed
multidecadal weakening of the EICC, Figure 7 isolates and analyzes the long-term

variability of these specific forcing regions. The left panel defines the spatial masks
used for the area-averaged analysis: the equatorial waveguide (5S–5N, green
hatching) representing the remote forcing domain; the interior Bay of Bengal gyre
region (blue hatching) representing the Ekman pumping domain; and the western
boundary along-shore region (red hatching) representing the local wind forcing
domain. The right panels (a–d) display the corresponding area-averaged monthly
time series. To maintain consistency with the EICC velocity analysis and to isolate
the multidecadal signals from the highly energetic seasonal and interannual (e.g.,
Indian Ocean Dipole) fluctuations, a 500-day low-pass filter was applied to all time
series. Panel (b) illustrates the low-pass filtered Sea Level Anomaly (SLA) over the
interior Bay of Bengal. The pronounced positive trend reflects the basin-wide sealevel rise, a well-documented consequence of overall warming in the Indian Ocean
(Schott et al., 2009, Srinivasu U, 2017). However, the dynamics of the coastal
current are dictated by the horizontal pressure gradients driven by the wind field,
which are examined in the remaining panels. Panels (a), (c), and (d) present the
low-frequency variability and linear trends of the physical forcing parameters:
Ekman pumping in the interior, local alongshore wind stress magnitude, and
equatorial wind stress magnitude, respectively. The data reveal a discernible
downward trend in the magnitude of both the local alongshore wind stress (Panel c)
and the remote equatorial wind stress (Panel d). The significance of this figure to
the current study is profound, as it provides the dynamical closure to the
observations made in Figure 6. The multidecadal weakening of the EICC is not an
isolated coastal phenomenon but rather a direct dynamic response to a basin-wide
relaxation of its primary atmospheric drivers. A reduction in the equatorial wind
stress directly diminishes the amplitude of the eastward-propagating equatorial
Kelvin waves, subsequently leading to weaker coastally trapped waves traveling
around the Bay of Bengal. Concurrently, the weakening of the local alongshore
winds reduces the direct momentum transfer to the boundary current. These
findings corroborate recent climate studies which suggest that asymmetric warming
across the Indian Ocean has led to a dampening of the overall monsoonal wind
circulation (e.g., Roxy et al., 2015). Consequently, the novel coastal altimetry
dataset not only resolves the near-shore current dynamics but successfully
captures the boundary current's integrated response to shifting basin-wide climatic
forcing.
Because the EICC is the primary western boundary current of the basin, the
consequences of a weakening EICC are profound and multifold. The EICC plays a
critical role in the mass budget of the Bay of Bengal, particularly during its
equatorward phase (post-monsoon to winter), when it exports massive volumes of
low-salinity riverine water southward along the eastern coast of India. A weakening
of this southward flow would reduce the efficiency of this freshwater export.
Consequently, this could lead to a progressive freshening and increased

stratification in the northern Bay, while the southern Bay and the southeastern
Arabian Sea might experience higher-than-normal salinities.
During the southwest monsoon, the poleward-flowing EICC acts in concert with
local southwesterly winds to drive coastal upwelling, drawing cold, nutrient-rich
subsurface waters into the euphotic zone. A weakening of both the EICC and its
primary atmospheric drivers implies a reduction in the intensity of this upwelling.
This would suppress primary productivity along the coast, fundamentally altering
the coastal biogeochemical cycling and potentially impacting regional fisheries that
rely on these seasonal nutrient pulses.

Acknowledgments:
We thank the Director, INCOIS, Hyderabad (Ministry of Earth Sciences,
Government of India) for encouragement and support. All the data analysis and
visualization is done using python with extensive usage of the library xarray among
other libraries. Authors would like to thank the open source developers and
maintainers of these libraries.

References:
Amol, P., Shankar, D., Aparna, S.G., Shenoi, S.S.C., Fernando, V., Shetye, S.R., Mukherjee, A.,
Agarvadekar, Y., Khalap, S., Satelkar, N.P., 2012. Observational evidence from direct
current measurements for propagation of remotely forced waves on the shelf off the west
coast of India. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans 117, 2011JC007606.
https://doi.org/10.1029/2011JC007606
Arunraj, K.S., n.d. QA/QC Manual for Coastal HF Radar - Indian Coastal Ocean Radar Network
(ICORN).
Birol, F., Fuller, N., Lyard, F., Cancet, M., Niño, F., Delebecque, C., Fleury, S., Toublanc, F.,
Melet, A., Saraceno, M., Léger, F., 2017. Coastal applications from nadir altimetry:
Example of the X-TRACK regional products. Adv. Space Res. 59, 936–953.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asr.2016.11.005
Birol, F., Léger, F., Passaro, M., Cazenave, A., Niño, F., Calafat, F.M., Shaw, A., Legeais, J.-F.,
Gouzenes, Y., Schwatke, C., Benveniste, J., 2021. The X-TRACK/ALES multi-mission
processing system: New advances in altimetry towards the coast. Adv. Space Res. 67, 2398–
2415. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asr.2021.01.049
Bouffard, J., Pascual, A., Ruiz, S., Faugère, Y., Tintoré, J., 2010. Coastal and mesoscale dynamics
characterization using altimetry and gliders: A case study in the Balearic Sea. J. Geophys.
Res. Oceans 115, 2009JC006087. https://doi.org/10.1029/2009JC006087
Cazenave, A., Gouzenes, Y., Birol, F., Leger, F., Passaro, M., Calafat, F.M., Shaw, A., Nino, F.,
Legeais, J.F., Oelsmann, J., Restano, M., Benveniste, J., 2022. Sea level along the world’s
coastlines can be measured by a network of virtual altimetry stations. Commun. Earth
Environ. 3, 117. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-022-00448-z
Chelton, D.B., Esbensen, S.K., Schlax, M.G., Thum, N., Freilich, M.H., Wentz, F.J., Gentemann,
C.L., McPhaden, M.J., Schopf, P.S., 2001. Observations of Coupling between Surface Wind
Stress and Sea Surface Temperature in the Eastern Tropical Pacific. J. Clim. 14, 1479–1498.
https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0442(2001)014%3C1479:OOCBSW%3E2.0.CO;2
Cleveland, W.S., 1979. Robust Locally Weighted Regression and Smoothing Scatterplots. J. Am.
Stat. Assoc.
Durand, F., Shankar, D., Birol, F., Shenoi, S.S.C., 2009. Spatiotemporal structure of the East India
Coastal Current from satellite altimetry. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans 114, 2008JC004807.
https://doi.org/10.1029/2008JC004807
Durand, F., Shankar, D., Birol, F., Shenoi, S.S.C., 2008. Estimating boundary currents from satellite
altimetry: A case study for the east coast of India. J. Oceanogr. 64, 831–845.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10872-008-0069-2
Dohan, K., Maximenko, N., 2010. Monitoring Ocean Currents with Satellite Sensors.
Oceanography 23, 94–103. https://doi.org/10.5670/oceanog.2010.08
Jebri, F., Birol, F., Zakardjian, B., Bouffard, J., Sammari, C., 2016. Exploiting coastal altimetry to
improve the surface circulation scheme over the central Mediterranean Sea. J. Geophys. Res.
Oceans 121, 4888–4909. https://doi.org/10.1002/2016JC011961
Jérôme Benveniste, Florence Birol, Francisco Calafat, Anny Cazenave, Habib Dieng, et al.. Coastal
sea level anomalies and associated trends from Jason satellite altimetry over 2002–2018.
Scientific Data , 2020, 7 (1), pp.357. ⟨10.1038/s41597-020-00694-w⟩. ⟨hal-04631951⟩
Johnson, E.S., Bonjean, F., Lagerloef, G.S.E., Gunn, J.T., Mitchum, G.T., 2007. Validation and
Error Analysis of OSCAR Sea Surface Currents. J. Atmospheric Ocean. Technol. 24, 688–
701. https://doi.org/10.1175/JTECH1971.1
Karney, C.F.F., 2013. Algorithms for geodesics. J. Geod. 87, 43–55.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00190-012-0578-z

Lagerloef, G.S.E., Mitchum, G.T., Lukas, R.B., Niiler, P.P., 1999. Tropical Pacific near‐surface
currents estimated from altimeter, wind, and drifter data. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans 104,
23313–23326. https://doi.org/10.1029/1999JC900197
Le Hénaff, M., Roblou, L., Bouffard, J., 2011. Characterizing the Navidad current interannual
variability using coastal altimetry. Ocean Dyn. 61, 425–437. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10236010-0360-9
Liu, Y., Weisberg, R.H., Vignudelli, S., Roblou, L., Merz, C.R., 2012. Comparison of the XTRACK altimetry estimated currents with moored ADCP and HF radar observations on the
West Florida Shelf. Adv. Space Res. 50, 1085–1098.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asr.2011.09.012
McPhaden, M.J., Meyers, G., Ando, K., Masumoto, Y., Murty, V.S.N., Ravichandran, M.,
Syamsudin, F., Vialard, J., Yu, L., Yu, W., 2009. RAMA: The Research Moored Array for
African–Asian–Australian Monsoon Analysis and Prediction *. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc. 90,
459–480. https://doi.org/10.1175/2008BAMS2608.1
Mukherjee, A., Shankar, D., Fernando, V., Amol, P., Aparna, S.G., Fernandes, R., Michael, G.S.,
Khalap, S.T., Satelkar, N.P., Agarvadekar, Y., Gaonkar, M.G., Tari, A.P., Kankonkar, A.,
Vernekar, S., 2014. Observed seasonal and intraseasonal variability of the East India Coastal
Current on the continental slope. J. Earth Syst. Sci. 123, 1197–1232.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12040-014-0471-7
Paul, B., Baduru, B., Paul, A., Francis, P.A., Shetye, S.R., 2021. Absence of the annual cycle in
shelf current inshore of the East Indian Coastal Current. Cont. Shelf Res. 215, 104355.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csr.2021.104355
Passaro, M., Cipollini, P., Vignudelli, S., Quartly, G.D., Snaith, H.M., 2014. ALES: A multimission adaptive subwaveform retracker for coastal and open ocean altimetry. Remote Sens.
Environ. 145, 173–189. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2014.02.008
Parke, M.E., Stewart, R.H., Farless, D.L., Cartwright, D.E., 1987. On the choice of orbits for an
altimetric satellite to study ocean circulation and tides. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans 92, 11693–
11707. https://doi.org/10.1029/JC092iC11p11693
Powell, B.S., Leben, R.R., 2004. An Optimal Filter for Geostrophic Mesoscale Currents from
Along-Track Satellite Altimetry. J. Atmospheric Ocean. Technol. 21, 1633–1642.
https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0426(2004)021%3C1633:AOFFGM%3E2.0.CO;2
Quartly, G.D., Legeais, J.-F., Ablain, M., Zawadzki, L., Fernandes, M.J., Rudenko, S., Carrère, L.,
García, P.N., Cipollini, P., Andersen, O.B., Poisson, J.-C., Mbajon Njiche, S., Cazenave, A.,
Benveniste, J., 2017. A new phase in the production of quality-controlled sea level data.
Earth Syst. Sci. Data 9, 557–572. https://doi.org/10.5194/essd-9-557-2017
Rio, M. ‐H., Mulet, S., Picot, N., 2014. Beyond GOCE for the ocean circulation estimate:
Synergetic use of altimetry, gravimetry, and in situ data provides new insight into
geostrophic and Ekman currents. Geophys. Res. Lett. 41, 8918–8925.
https://doi.org/10.1002/2014GL061773
Roblou, L., Lamouroux, J., Bouffard, J., Lyard, F., Le Hénaff, M., Lombard, A., Marsaleix, P., De
Mey, P., Birol, F., 2011. Post-processing Altimeter Data Towards Coastal Applications and
Integration into Coastal Models, in: Vignudelli, S., Kostianoy, A.G., Cipollini, P.,
Benveniste, J. (Eds.), Coastal Altimetry. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp.
217–246. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-12796-0_9
Roxy, M.K., Ritika, K., Terray, P., Murtugudde, R., Ashok, K., Goswami, B.N., 2015. Drying of
Indian subcontinent by rapid Indian Ocean warming and a weakening land-sea thermal
gradient. Nat. Commun. 6, 7423. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms8423
Schott, F.A., Xie, S., McCreary, J.P., 2009. Indian Ocean circulation and climate variability. Rev.
Geophys. 47, 2007RG000245. https://doi.org/10.1029/2007RG000245
Shankar, D., McCreary, J.P., Han, W., Shetye, S.R., 1996. Dynamics of the East India Coastal
Current: 1. Analytic solutions forced by interior Ekman pumping and local alongshore
winds. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans 101, 13975–13991. https://doi.org/10.1029/96JC00559

Srinivasu, U., Ravichandran, M., Han, W., Sivareddy, S., Rahman, H., Li, Y., Nayak, S., 2017.
Causes for the reversal of North Indian Ocean decadal sea level trend in recent two decades.
Clim. Dyn. 49, 3887–3904. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00382-017-3551-y
Strub, P.T., Chereskin, T.K., Niiler, P.P., James, C., Levine, M.D., 1997. Altimeter‐derived
variability of surface velocities in the California Current System: 1. Evaluation of TOPEX
altimeter velocity resolution. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans 102, 12727–12748.
https://doi.org/10.1029/97JC00448
Sudre, J., Maes, C., Garçon, V., 2013. On the global estimates of geostrophic and Ekman surface
currents. Limnol. Oceanogr. Fluids Environ. 3, 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1215/215736892071927
Vignudelli, S., Cipollini, P., Roblou, L., Lyard, F., Gasparini, G.P., Manzella, G., Astraldi, M.,
2005. Improved satellite altimetry in coastal systems: Case study of the Corsica Channel
(Mediterranean Sea): IMPROVED SATELLITE ALTIMETRY IN COASTAL SYSTEMS.
Geophys. Res. Lett. 32, n/a-n/a. https://doi.org/10.1029/2005GL022602
Wang, W., Zhou, H., Zheng, S., Lü, G., Zhou, L., 2023. Ocean surface currents estimated from
satellite remote sensing data based on a global hexagonal grid. Int. J. Digit. Earth 16, 1073–
1093. https://doi.org/10.1080/17538947.2023.2192003
Yuan, Y., Castelao, R.M., He, R., 2017. Variability in along-shelf and cross-shelf circulation in the
South Atlantic Bight. Cont. Shelf Res. 134, 52–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csr.2017.01.006

