3378

JOURNAL OF CLIMATE

VOLUME 19

Decorrelation Scales of High-Resolution Turbulent Fluxes at the Ocean Surface and a
Method to Fill in Gaps in Satellite Data Products
ANASTASIA ROMANOU
Department of Applied Physics and Applied Mathematics, Columbia University, New York, New York

WILLIAM B. ROSSOW
NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies, New York, New York

SHU-HSIEN CHOU
Department of Atmospheric Sciences, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
(Manuscript received 3 February 2005, in final form 21 October 2005)
ABSTRACT
In the first part of the paper, a high space–time resolution (1° latitude/longitude and daily) dataset of the
turbulent fluxes at the ocean surface is used to estimate and study the seasonal to annual near-global maps
of the decorrelation scales of the latent and sensible heat fluxes. The decorrelation scales describe the
temporal and spatial patterns that dominate the flux fields (within a bandpass window) and hence reveal the
dominant variability in the air–sea interaction. Regional comparison to the decorrelation scales of the
flux-related variables such as the wind stress, the humidity difference, and the SST identifies the main
mechanism responsible for the variability in each flux field.
In the second part of the paper, the decorrelation scales are used to develop a method for filling missing
values in the dataset that result from the incomplete satellite coverage. Weight coefficients in a linear
regression function are determined from the spatial and temporal decorrelations and are functions of zonal
and meridional distance and time. Therefore they account for all spatial and temporal patterns on scales
greater than 1 day and 1° latitude/longitude and less than 1 yr and the ocean basin scale. The method is
evaluated by simulating the missing-value distribution of the Goddard Satellite-Based Surface Turbulent
Fluxes, version 2 (GSSTF2) dataset in the NCEP SST, the International Satellite Climatology Project
(ISCCP)-FD (fluxes calculated using D1 series) surface radiation, and the Global Precipitation Climatology
Project (GPCP) datasets and by comparing the filled datasets to the original ones. Main advantages of the
method are that the decorrelation scales are unrestricted functions of space and time; only information
internal to the flux field is used in the interpolation scheme, and the computation cost of the method is low
enough to facilitate its use in similar large datasets.

1. Introduction
The decorrelation scales of the ocean surface fluxes
characterize the spatial and temporal variability, the
pattern evolution, and the statistical significance of air–
sea interaction phenomena over a wide range of frequencies and wavenumbers. These scales range from
daily to annual and from mesoscale to global. However,
due to the significant amount of observations involved
and the computational cost in estimating these scales at

Corresponding author address: Dr. Anastasia Romanou, Columbia University, 2880 Broadway, New York, NY 10025.
E-mail: ar2235@columbia.edu

long lags (more than a few weeks and basinwide), decorrelation scales are presently only known regionally and
for short lags.
Many studies show that the temporal decorrelation
scales of sea surface properties differ significantly regionally and vary between 5 days to more than a year.
They also show that spatial decorrelation scales, ranging from hundreds to thousands of kilometers, are
anisotropic as they differ significantly in the zonal and
meridional direction. For example, Chu et al. (2002)
found less spatial variability in the sea surface temperature (SST) and the sea surface salinity (SSS) decorrelation scales in the summer than in the winter in the
Japan Sea and associated it with strong seasonality in

© 2006 American Meteorological Society

Unauthenticated | Downloaded 04/25/24 05:56 PM UTC

JCLI3773

15 JULY 2006

ROMANOU ET AL.

the net surface heat flux. Temporal scales were shorter
in the summer than in the winter. Alexander et al.
(2001) explained the strong autocorrelation (and thus
the decorrelation patterns) in the SST anomaly from
winter to winter in the North Pacific Ocean by the
shoaling of the annual mixed layer. Molinari and Festa
(2000) estimated such scales from the Comprehensive
Ocean–Atmosphere Data Set (COADS) in the Tropics
and found that they differ significantly in the zonal
(600–1400 km) and meridional (300–700 km) directions
with longer scales in the tropical Pacific. Lagerloef and
Delcroix (1999) found dominant scales of 70–90 days
and 200–400 km for the SSS in the western Pacific warm
pool. Borzelli and Ligi (1999) related short decorrelation scales of SST to strong seasonality in upwelling in
the south Adriatic Sea. Tanaka (1997) showed that the
Niño-3 SST exhibits a biennial oscillation. Kessler et al.
(1996) found 5–100-day time scales in the equatorial
Pacific and spatial scales of half the width of the Pacific.
The meridional scales in the eastern equatorial Pacific
were longer than in the western equatorial Pacific and
were associated with the extension of the equatorial
cold tongue. Ikeda (1993) estimated 50-day scales from
the sea surface height in the separation region of the
Gulf Stream. The spatial scales along and across the
current were 120 and 150 km, respectively. From an
optimal XBT network, Sprintall and Meyers (1991)
found scales of 60 days and 300 and 1500 km in the
meridional and zonal direction, respectively, in the
eastern Pacific.
Some of these studies (Alexander et al. 2001; Borzelli
and Ligi 1999; Ikeda 1993) as well as Polito et al. (2000)
suggest that satellite observations, which measure
ocean surface fluxes both at high resolution in space
and time and over a very wide range of scales, are
particularly useful in constructing detailed decorrelation maps for these fluxes. However, satellite observations usually have some missing values at points that lie
outside the tracks of the satellite view. Although missing values do not affect the construction of the decorrelation maps (as long as they are not too numerous),
they have to be filled in since, in some applications such
as ocean model forcing, missing values are not acceptable. Filling in gaps is usually done through lower or
higher order interpolation techniques (Polito et al.
2000; and references therein). In the present paper we
describe a filling method based on the information provided by the spatial and temporal decorrelation maps of
high-resolution ocean surface turbulent fluxes.
The dataset we use is the Goddard Satellite-Based
Surface Turbulent Fluxes version 2 (GSSTF2) (Chou et
al. 2003) dataset, which represents one of the very few
observations of the ocean surface turbulent fluxes at

3379

high resolution (1° latitude/longitude and daily), covering a long period (1987–2000), and useful in the study of
air–sea interactions across the globe (cf. Curry et al.
2004). The gaps in it are irregularly large in time and
space but sufficiently few to allow for estimation of the
decorrelation scales.
In the following, the GSSTF2 dataset is described in
section 2, and the decorrelation scales of the turbulent
fluxes are computed from the original dataset and analyzed in section 3. A method for filling the gaps in the
dataset based on the decorrelation scales is presented
and tested in section 4, and finally some conclusions are
offered in section 5.

2. The dataset
The GSSTF2 dataset (available from Goddard Earth
Sciences Data and Information Services Center; Chou
et al. 2003) contains near-global (approximately 60°S–
60°N ocean; 1° latitude/longitude) gridded values of
surface fluxes and some related quantities based mainly
on Special Sensor Microwave Imager(SSM/I) data from
the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP)
F8, F10, F11, F13, and F14 satellites, combined with the
air temperature and SST of the National Centers for
Environmental Prediction–National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCEP–NCAR) reanalysis (Kalnay
et al. 1996). It covers a 13.5-yr period from July 1987
through December 2000. The product used here includes the latent and sensible heat fluxes, the nearsurface air (10 m) specific humidity, the zonal and meridional wind stress, the precipitable water in the lowest
500 m, the 10-m wind speed, and the air–sea temperature and humidity differences.
Specifically, the product was computed from
1) the SSM/I 10-m wind speed, derived by Wentz (1997);
2) the wind stress direction taken from the 10-m wind
field, which was derived from ship and buoy measurements and the NCEP–NCAR reanalysis based
on Atlas et al. (1996);
3) the air–sea temperature difference of NCEP–
NCAR reanalysis;
4) the SSM/I 10-m air specific humidity, which was derived from the water vapor amounts in the total atmospheric column and the lowest 500 m (Chou et al.
1995, 1997); the former was taken from Wentz
(1997), while the later was derived from SSM/I radiances using the method of Schulz et al. (1993); and
5) the air–sea humidity difference, which was derived
from the 10-m specific humidity and the NCEP–
NCAR reanalysis SST (5-day means), including a
2% reduction in saturation specific humidity at SST
due to the salinity effect.

Unauthenticated | Downloaded 04/25/24 05:56 PM UTC

3380

JOURNAL OF CLIMATE

The dataset has missing values at high latitudes in the
presence of sea ice or when precipitation does not allow
for the retrieval of precipitable water in the lowest 500
m (Chou et al. 1997). We do not assess the quality of
the GSSTF2 dataset here, as this has been done by
others through comparison to 10 high-quality field experiments during 1991–99 and against other turbulent
flux products (Chou et al. 2003, 2004). We instead focus
on the variability of the turbulent fluxes in GSSTF2
since this dataset (at the time this study took place) had
the highest resolution both temporally and spatially
among similar products (Seaflux Group; Curry et al.
2004). We do, however, discuss the effects that possible
shortcomings in the dataset may have on the representation of this variability.
The GSSTF2 dataset contains missing values due to
SSM/I coverage, precipitation, and sea ice that were
originally filled in the monthly mean and annual-mean
climatologies using the 8-nearest-point distancesquared spatial interpolation method. The nature of
these voids is described and another method for interpolating the missing values is offered in section 4. In the
same section, the method is tested in other datasets
such as the International Satellite Climatology Project
(ISCCP)-FD surface shortwave downward radiation,
the NCEP SST, and the daily Global Precipitation Climatology Project (GPCP) precipitation field that contain no voids.

3. Decorrelation scales of the turbulent fluxes
In this section we describe how the decorrelation
scales are computed and we discuss their regional and
seasonal variation. Comparisons are made between the
latent and sensible heat flux scales and the scales of
flux-related variables such as the wind stress, the air–
sea humidity difference, and the SST.
The autocorrelation function, ␳(m), of a discrete data
series { fi}, evaluated at data points i ⫽ 1, . . . , N, is

␳共m兲 ⫽

1
N⫺m

N⫺m⫺1

兺 共 f ⫺ f 兲共 f
i

i⫹m ⫺ f 兲,

共1兲

i⫽1

where m is the lag, N is the total number of data points,
and f is the sample mean. Equation (1) describes the
dependence of the flux fi on the flux fi⫹m at points that
are m lags apart. The decorrelation scale is defined here
as the lag m0 of the first zero-crossing of the autocovariance function of the series, which is the autocorrelation function divided by the variance, that is, ␳(m)/
␳(0). This choice for the definition of the decorrelation
scale is not unique, but it is the most common in literature. In general the shape of the autocorrelation function is different from one point to another, and in prin-

VOLUME 19

ciple one has to approximate it with a parametric equation for more precise decorrelation-scale definitions.
Because higher-order parametric fitting may impose a
heavier computational burden while not improving the
result significantly, we choose the “zero crossing” definition for this study that does not take into account the
shape and therefore yields an upper limit in the estimation of the scales. The upper limit expresses the distance or time scale beyond which there is no longer
dependence between values of the series; therefore
these scales represent the lowest-frequency variability
at each point.
Since the series is in general a function of both time
and space, the decorrelation scales can be computed
independently in time and space, separately for the
zonal and meridional directions. The physical interpretation of the decorrelation scale is that at smaller scales
than the decorrelation scale the flux changes are correlated and at larger scales they are uncorrelated. In the
context of our estimates, large (small) temporal decorrelation scales express slow (fast) flux changes and are
associated with persistent (ephemeral) structures or
low (high) frequencies. Similarly, large (small) spatial
decorrelation scales express flux changes over a large
(small) distance and can be taken as an indication of
continuous (fragmented) structures or large (small)
wavelengths. Von Storch and Zwiers (1999) point out
that the decorrelation scale depends heavily on the
sampling time (which for the GSSTF2 dataset is daily)
since scales less than the sampling time cannot be resolved. Similarly, scales at or longer than the measurement period (here 1 yr) cannot also be resolved. However, von Storch and Zwiers point out that “comparison
between timeseries with the same sampling interval
helps us identify which processes have larger memory”
(von Storch and Zwiers 1999, 371–374), which is exactly
the point of the present analysis.
In this study, the annual temporal scales of the turbulent fluxes from the GSSTF2 dataset are computed
first for every year between 1989 and 2000 and for daily
lags at each grid point. The decorrelation scales are
then averaged over the 12-yr period: this product will
be hereafter referred to as the “yearly scales.” We
therefore focus on scale variations that range from a
couple of days up to one year. Second, we compute the
temporal decorrelation scales from records that span
each season for every year between 1989 and 2000. We
again average over the 12-yr period and this product,
referred to as the “seasonal” decorrelation scales, describes the intraseasonal part of the spectrum. Studies
suggest that there is high correlation in the tropical
regions for lags longer than 1 yr (interannual) (Alexander et al. 2001), but here, only scales less than 1 yr are

Unauthenticated | Downloaded 04/25/24 05:56 PM UTC

15 JULY 2006

ROMANOU ET AL.

discussed. The spatial scales, similarly, are computed
along the zonal and meridional directions separately
and for each year between 1989 and 2000. Land mask
and missing value points are excluded. Record means
are constructed based on the 12-yr period and the final
products are divided into four seasons.
There is no limit imposed on either spatial or temporal lags; thus all scales (greater than 1° and 1 day and
less than the major oceanic basin scale and a year or a
season) of features are included. In the following, when
discussing temporal decorrelation scales, the terms
longer (shorter) scales refer to lower (higher) frequency variability and, when discussing spatial decorrelation scales, the terms larger (smaller) scales refer to
lower (higher) wavenumber variability.
Next, the decorrelation scales of the latent and sensible heat fluxes at the surface of the ocean from the
GSSTF2 dataset are computed and compared to the
decorrelation scales of the wind stress, the humidity,
and the sea surface temperature. The geographical and
temporal structures of all the decorrelation scales are
also described and discussed.

a. Temporal scales of latent and sensible heat fluxes
The latent heat flux, L, in the GSSTF2 dataset is
computed by the bulk aerodynamic formula (Chou 1993):
L ⫽ ␳L␷CE共U ⫺ Us兲共q ⫺ qs兲,

共2兲

where ␳ is the air density, L␷ ⫽ the latent heat of vaporization ⫽ 2.5 ⫻ 106 J kg⫺1, and U and q are the wind
speed and the specific humidity at the reference height.
The wind speed at the sea surface, Us, is very small and
taken to be 0.55 of the friction velocity u , and qs, the
*
specific humidity at sea surface, is the saturation value
of the sea surface temperature corrected for mean salinity. The transfer coefficient CE in Eq. (2) depends on
the atmospheric stability functions (determined from
the reference height, wind speed, and air–sea temperature and humidity differences) and the surface roughness lengths of momentum and moisture. It is computed based on the Monin–Obukhov surface layer similarity theory [as described in the Chou (1993) and Chou
et al. (2003) papers about the GSSTF2 development
process].

1) YEARLY DECORRELATION SCALES
The yearly temporal decorrelation scales of the latent
heat flux (Fig. 1a) show significant regional variance
with scales up to 1 yr. Since wind and air–sea humidity
difference determine latent heat flux [Eq. (2)], their
variability can reveal the dominant cause of the variation of the evaporative processes regionally.

3381

The longest time scales in the latent heat flux (⬃90
days) are found in the equatorial regions of all the
ocean basins (Fig. 1a), implying that the variability
there is mainly intraseasonal. Comparison with the
wind stress scales shows that the dominant cause of the
slower variations of evaporation in the intertropical
convergence zone (ITCZ) between 0° and 10°N, in the
western Pacific warm pool, and in the Atlantic Ocean is
the persistent and unidirectional trade winds system
(also exhibiting long decorrelation scales of 90 days in
Fig. 1c). The meridional winds vary on 60-day scales in
the western Pacific warm pool (Fig. 1d). Such periods of
variability that are found here (given that they represent upper limits of the observed variability; see section
3) are consistent with periods usually identified with the
Madden–Julian oscillation [MJO: 30–60 days, as in
McPhaden (1999) and Takayabu et al. (1999)]. In fact,
in the western tropical Pacific zonal wind stress variability controls the latent heat flux changes as the similar scales there imply. In the eastern Pacific, between
150° and 100°W at the equator, the wavelike features in
the meridional wind (Fig. 1d) with spatial scales of
about 1500 km and time scales between 60 and 90 days
are associated with tropical instability waves (Polito
and Sato 2003; Chelton et al. 2001).
Elsewhere in the Tropics, long decorrelation scales
are associated with intraseasonal variability in the latent heat flux and air–sea humidity difference (Figs. 1a
and 1e). They occur near the mouth of the Congo River
in coastal western Africa (around 10°S, 5°–20°W) and
in the South Pacific (0°–10°S). These are regions of
extensive and persistent cloud cover (low marine stratocumulus clouds in western Africa and western South
America) or high thick clouds as in the ITCZ in the
eastern Pacific and western Central America based on
the ISCCP cloud climatology (Rossow and Schiffer
1999) and high precipitation rates (Adler et al. 2003).
However, Figs. 1c, 1d, and 1e also show 50–90-day
scales in the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal, which
are not associated with analogous long decorrelation
scales in the latent heat flux (5–30-day scales). In these
regions, evaporation is highly variable but winds and
humidity are not. Figure 2 explains why this is so. The
zonal wind and the humidity difference time series in
this region are nearly 90° out of phase (Fig. 2) and thus
low frequency variability in the evaporation caused by
these two factors cancels out so that higher frequency
variability dominates.
Along the storm tracks in the Northern Hemisphere
(northwest Atlantic between 30° and 60°N; northwest
Pacific between 30° and 60°N), large transient disturbances cause high frequency variability in the winds
(ⱕ30 days; Figs. 1c and 1d). However, high persistence

Unauthenticated | Downloaded 04/25/24 05:56 PM UTC

3382

JOURNAL OF CLIMATE

VOLUME 19

FIG. 1. Yearly temporal decorrelation scales (in days) for (a) latent heat flux (W m⫺2), (b) sensible heat flux (W m⫺2), (c) zonal wind
stress (N m⫺2), (d) meridional wind stress (N m⫺2), (e) air–sea humidity difference (g kg⫺2) from the GSSTF2 dataset, and (f) SST (°C)
from the NCEP–NCAR reanalysis.

of clouds in these regions (Rossow and Schiffer 1999)
and lasting humidity patterns (Fig. 1e) at 40–70-day
scales imply that flux exchanges between ocean and
atmosphere locally are more important than largerscale wind effects; therefore humidity variations are
mostly responsible for the variability in the evaporative
patterns.
The shortest scales in the latent heat flux variability
(ⱕ20 days) are found in the equatorial cold tongue (0°–
10°S, 80°–120°W) due to local upwelling in connection
with high variability of the winds there (Figs. 1c and
1d). Other regions of high variability are over the oceanic subtropical gyres and the eastern parts of the subpolar gyres. There, the dominant scales are set by the

wind stress since both components (Figs. 1c and 1d)
vary at slightly shorter scales than humidity (Fig. 1e).
The region south of 20°S is characterized by significantly shorter scales (ⱕ25 days) in all of the fields in
Fig. 1 compared to the Northern Hemisphere, as was
also indicated by Barnston (1996). In the Northern
Hemisphere, land masses and orography impose larger
scales on the atmospheric circulation in the form of
standing planetary waves with wavenumbers ⱕ3, but in
the Southern Hemisphere higher wavenumbers imply
that higher frequency variability dominates.
Relatively long scales (40–60 days) in the latent heat
flux are found southwest of Australia in the Indian
Ocean (near the Amsterdam Islands) and are associ-

Unauthenticated | Downloaded 04/25/24 05:56 PM UTC

15 JULY 2006

3383

ROMANOU ET AL.

FIG. 2. Time series of the area-averaged (a) latent heat flux (W m⫺2), (b) zonal wind stress
(N m⫺2), and (c) humidity difference (g kg⫺2) in the Arabian Sea region (0°–30°N and
20°–95°W) from the GSSTF2 dataset.

ated with similarly long scales in the zonal wind stress
there (Fig. 1c).
The yearly decorrelation scales in Fig. 1 resulted
from averaging the decorrelation scales for each year
between 1989 and 2000. The standard deviation of all
yearly scales ranges between 20 and 30 days in the regions 2°–10°N and 2°–10°S in the East Pacific and along
10°S and 70°–80°W in the Indian Ocean and between
10 and 20 days in the rest of the ocean, implying that the
averages shown in Fig. 1 are good estimates.
The sensible heat flux, H, in the GSSTF2 dataset is
computed by the bulk formula,
H ⫽ ␳CpCH共U ⫺ Us兲共␪s ⫺ ␪兲,

共3兲

where Cp is the isobaric specific heat, ␪s and ␪ are the
sea surface and air (potential) temperatures respectively, and U and Us are the wind speed at the reference
height and at the surface, respectively (Chou 1993).
Similar to Eq. (2), the transfer coefficient CH is computed based on the surface layer Monin–Obukhov similarity theory (Chou 1993; Chou et al. 2003): CH depends
on the atmospheric stability functions determined from
the reference height, wind speed, air–sea temperature
and humidity differences, and surface roughness
lengths of momentum and sensible heat. Similar to the
analysis on the latent heat flux, the relative roles the

wind and SST played in the determination of the sensible heat flux variability are evaluated below.
The lowest frequency variability in the sensible heat
flux is found in the equatorial eastern Pacific, the equatorial South Atlantic, and the Arabian Sea, as shown in
Fig. 1b. In the eastern Pacific such large scales (60–90
days) are mostly associated with the meridional wind
stress variability shown in Fig. 1d and the SST variability shown in Fig. 1f. Off the coast of Peru and northern
Chile, the lower frequencies (longer scales) are associated with persisting SST signatures. Near the coast this
is due to coastal upwelling. In the equatorial Atlantic,
the low frequency variability (around 60 days) is associated with zonal winds and SST and is linked to upwelling along the African coast. In the Arabian Sea, the
longer scales are attributed to wind changes when light
and cold air blows over warm water.
Large time scales are also found along the Northern
Hemisphere storm tracks (northwest Atlantic and Pacific Oceans between 30° and 60°N) and they are mostly
attributed to slow changes in SST (Fig. 1f). This is the
result of the 5-day averaging in the NCEP SST product.
Cold continental air outbreaks sweep over warm ocean
in winter and cause large temperature differences, intense cooling, and high sensible heat fluxes to occur.
Similar to the latent heat, the sensible heat flux exhibits larger variability in the Southern Hemisphere.

Unauthenticated | Downloaded 04/25/24 05:56 PM UTC

3384

JOURNAL OF CLIMATE

VOLUME 19

FIG. 3. Scatterplots of the area-averaged decorrelation scales. The horizontal axes are everywhere latent heat flux scales
(in days) and the vertical axes are the scales (in days) of the following variables, ⌬: humidity difference, *: zonal wind
stress, 䊊: meridional wind stress, and ⵧ: SST. The areas are (a) Arabian Sea (10°S–30°N, 20°–120°W), (b) Atlantic
stratocumulus (20°S–0°, 20°E–20°W), (c) storm tracks (30°⫺90°N, 180°–180°), (d) warm pool (0°–20°N, 120°W–180°), (e)
Pacific stratocumulus (10°S⫺0°, 150°⫺60°E), and (f) Niño-3 (5°N⫺5°S, 150°⫺90°E). The dark solid line represents the
1:1 change. Data points below this line represent higher variability (shorter scales) than that of the latent heat flux while
data points above that line represent variability at longer scales (lower frequencies) than latent heat flux.

2) INTERANNUAL VARIABILITY
In this section we examine how the intraseasonal signals in the fluxes described in the previous section vary
from year to year and regionally. Figure 3 shows crossscatter diagrams of the decorrelation scales in different
regions. Each point pairs the latent heat flux scales with
those of an independent variable, like wind stress, humidity difference, or SST. The horizontal axis in each
plot is the latent heat flux scale and the vertical axis is
independent variable scale. The straight line represents
variability at the latent heat flux scales (this is the line
that bisects the diagram). Points below (above) this line
show higher (lower) frequency variability than that of
the latent heat flux. The statistical properties of the
distributions are synopsized in Table 1. In the Arabian
Sea (Fig. 3a) the latent heat flux varies at shorter scales
than all of the variables including SST, as was also

shown earlier (Fig. 2). There is not large interannual
variability in the scale relations in this region as it is
expressed by the standard deviation from the means
shown in Table 1. The humidity difference variability is
closer to that of evaporation. In the Atlantic stratocumulus region and the boreal storm track regions (Figs.
3b and 3c, respectively), humidity variability better correlates with that of evaporation. Both wind components
vary at lower frequencies, while SST varies at much
higher frequency. These scale relations vary little from
year to year (Table 1). In the warm pool area (Fig. 3d),
humidity difference variability is shifted to lower frequencies, while wind and SST variability is shifted to
higher frequencies. The interannual signal here is large
(Table 1). In the Pacific stratocumulus region (Fig. 3e),
humidity interannual variability is better correlated to
that of evaporation during most of the years in this
study, while wind variability is shifted to lower frequen-

Unauthenticated | Downloaded 04/25/24 05:56 PM UTC

15 JULY 2006

3385

ROMANOU ET AL.

TABLE 1. Mean distances (in days) from the angle bisector line of the data points shown in the cross-scatterplot of the independent
variable (left column) vs latent heat flux L for the regions shown in Fig. 3; standard deviations from the means are shown in parentheses.
Positive (negative) mean distances correspond to decorrelation scales that are longer (shorter) than those of the latent heat flux.

Zonal wind stress
Meridional wind stress
Humidity difference
SST

Arabian Sea

Atlantic Sc

Storm track

Warm pool

Pacific Sc

Niño-3

21 (3)
22 (3)
9 (4)
24 (6)

⫺22 (4)
⫺25 (4)
6 (2)
25 (6)

⫺24 (3)
⫺32 (3)
⫺1 (1)
25 (3)

7 (5)
10 (7)
⫺8 (6)
31 (6)

⫺10 (8)
⫺8 (6)
⫺0.2 (6)
28 (13)

⫺5 (7)
13 (6)
3 (5)
32 (18)

cies. The interannual variability is large (Table 1). Finally, in the Niño-3 region, zonal and meridional wind
components vary at higher and lower frequencies, respectively, than latent heat flux (Fig. 3f), while humidity difference changes at similar scales but the interannual variability is large (Table 1).
Further, focusing on the interannual variability in the
Niño-3 area (5°N–5°S, 150°–90°E; Fig. 4), the decorrelation scales differ significantly between El Niño and La
Niña years, implying that distinct scales of variability
dominate in each regime. Several studies attribute the
onset or the termination of an El Niño event to the
MJO, which has typical periods of 30–60 days. Westerly
wind bursts associated with the MJO might be responsible for the initiation of El Niño events (McPhaden
1999), while intensification of easterly trade winds also
associated with MJO might cause termination of El
Niño events (Takayabu et al. 1999). In the GSSTF2
dataset, three El Niño events are captured (1992, 1995,
and 1998) and four La Niña events (1989, 1994, 1997,
and 2000). During El Niño years, latent heat flux, zonal
wind, and air–sea humidity difference exhibit high frequency variability at scales less than 25–40 days (Fig. 4),

which is at the lower limit of the MJO period. On the
other hand, La Niña years exhibit low frequency variability at scales of 50–70 days that is at the upper limit
of the MJO period. The two regimes are well separated
in the spectra of these quantities. Normal conditions in
the Niño-3 region encompass variability between the
two regimes. On the other hand, although SST variability is dominated by low frequencies (110–125 days) during El Niños and higher frequencies (70–85 days) during La Niñas, the sensible heat flux does not exhibit a
clear separation between the two regimes (Fig. 4).
Moreover, all El Niños are not the same: In the 1992
El Niño, sensible heat flux shows particularly slow variability (80 days) due to very slowly varying SST (Fig. 4),
but in the other two El Niños (1995 and 1998) the variability has a higher frequency (50–60 days), which is
probably associated with the variability in the air temperature rather than the SST. However, air–sea humidity difference variability is dominated by even shorter
scales (32–38 days) during all El Niños and longer
scales (50–80 days) during La Niñas. Zonal wind and
latent heat flux do not exhibit a clear scale separation
between the El Niño and La Niña events.

3) SEASONAL DEPENDENCE

FIG. 4. Yearly temporal decorrelation scales (in days) for latent
and sensible heat fluxes and the related variables (zonal wind
stress, air–sea humidity difference, and SST) in the Niño-3 region
(5°N⫺5°S, 150°⫺90°E).

Next, we focus on the intraseasonal-scale variability
by analyzing regionally the decorrelation scales averaged for the 3-month periods: DJF, MAM, JJA, and
SON (see section 3). Several studies have shown that
there is a significant seasonal signal in the ocean surface
decorrelation scales regionally. Barnston (1996) found
that more variability occurs during winter in most locations worldwide, and Chu et al. (2002) found shorter
time scales (i.e., higher-frequency variability) in the
summer in the Japan Sea. Here, the seasonal change in
the latent heat flux scales is shown in Fig. 5.
In the Tropics, shorter scales occur between September and February (2–15-day scales) and more during
the spring and summer months (12–20-day scales). The
marine stratocumulus regions in the equatorial Atlantic
and Pacific show 15–20-day scales in all four seasons,
particularly during spring (MAM, Fig. 5b). The strong
persistence of evaporation found along the storm tracks

Unauthenticated | Downloaded 04/25/24 05:56 PM UTC

3386

JOURNAL OF CLIMATE

VOLUME 19

FIG. 5. Seasonally averaged temporal decorrelation scales (in days) for the latent heat flux in each season: (a) DJF, (b) MAM, (c)
JJA, and (d) SON.

in the Northern Hemisphere (Fig. 1a) occurs predominantly in the spring (MAM, Fig. 5b) and at scales ranging between 10 and 20 days. Possibly due to the greater
thermal inertia of the ocean, the difference between the
oceanic and atmospheric conditions is greater in the
spring. The longer subseasonal scales (15–30 days) in
the Arabian Sea are found particularly in summer (Fig.
5c) and the shortest in winter (Fig. 5a). The Southern
Hemisphere, as discussed earlier, is subject to higher
frequency variability (5–10-day scales) throughout the
year. Off southwest Australia, locally longer scales occur during SON (Fig. 5d).
The seasonal dependence of the sensible heat flux is
similar to that of the latent heat flux (Fig. 6). The equatorial upwelling region in the eastern Pacific shows
greater variability (5–10 days) during spring (Fig. 6b)
and lower variability (15–20 days) during winter and
summer (Figs. 6a and 6c, respectively). The storm
tracks show lower variability during spring and fall (15–
20 days), particularly in the northwest Pacific. The Arabian Sea scales are longer (low frequency variability)
during summer and fall.

b. Spatial scales of latent and sensible heat fluxes
Similar to the temporal scales, zonal and meridional
decorrelation scales are computed as functions of day

of year and longitude or latitude, respectively. Spatial
scales can then be constructed by averaging over each
season (DJF, MAM, JJA, and SON) and projecting
onto the same map (Fig. 7).
Sensible heat flux scales are generally larger than
those of latent heat flux owing to the smoothness in the
air–sea temperature difference (attributed to the 5-dayaveraged NCEP SST) but are qualitatively very similar
to the latent heat flux scales; thus are not shown here.
In contrast to the temporal scales, boreal spatial scales
are shorter than austral scales owing to the landmass
distribution in the Northern Hemisphere, which restricts the scales found there.
Spatial patterns are more coherent in the zonal than
in the meridional direction, particularly during the transition seasons MAM and SON and in the tropical and
subtropical regions (Figs. 7b and 7d). Exceptions are
the boreal storm track regions and the South Pacific
Ocean during winter and summer seasons (DJF and
JJA, Figs. 7a and 7c) where the spatial patterns are
more meridionally oriented.
The largest scales, and hence the largest spatial coherence, are found in the trade wind band in the equatorial regions, particularly during DJF (3000–4000 km
for the latent heat flux in Fig. 7 and 5000–6000 km for
the sensible heat flux; not shown). That sensible heat

Unauthenticated | Downloaded 04/25/24 05:56 PM UTC

15 JULY 2006

3387

ROMANOU ET AL.

FIG. 6. As in Fig. 5 but for the sensible heat flux.

4. A method for filling the missing values

scales, the temporal, zonal, and meridional scales, in
order to account for variability in time and space. It has
been shown that methods for filling the gaps based on
autocorrelations work best if the coefficients are computed at each grid point and at each daily lag (Polito et
al. 2000). In the DBI method, where the decorrelation
scales are computed from the distribution of the autocorrelation functions, each flux (i.e., latent, sensible,
wind stress, and air–sea humidity difference) is dealt
with separately.
The distribution of the gaps in the GSSTF2 dataset is
not uniform in space or time. These voids tend to be
mostly latitudinally elongated (up to 40° in the north–
south direction) rather than longitudinally (up to 20° in
the east–west direction). There is no seasonal or regional tendency in their occurrence and they occasionally appear to “move” eastward. On any day they cover
5%–10% of the ocean, and the longest absence for any
given point is 25 days. However, the majority of the
points is observed within 5–7 days. The number of gaps
decreases with time as more satellites are used for the
data retrieval.
The DBI method is completed in the following steps:

In this section we describe a decorrelation-based interpolation (DBI) method for filling missing values in
the GSSTF2 dataset. This method utilizes all three

1) Temporal decorrelation scales are computed at each
grid point for daily lags up to 1 yr and for each year
between 1989 and 2000. The spatial decorrelation

flux spatial scales are larger than the latent heat flux
scales in the trade wind region is related to the fact that
SST is more smooth there (see section 2).
The upwelling region in the eastern Pacific has generally smaller scales during MAM and JJA (2700 km),
which is attributed to the smaller-scale patterns in the
wind system.
The northwest Atlantic and Pacific Ocean storm
track scales are smaller (500–2000 km in the latent heat
flux and 1500–2500 km in the sensible heat flux) and are
more zonally oriented during the transition seasons
MAM and SON. Chu et al. (2002) found less spatial
variability in the Japan Sea in the summer than in the
winter, in agreement with what is shown here. The
storm track spatial variability follows mostly that of the
humidity patterns.
Southern Ocean regions have larger scales during
DJF and MAM seasons and smaller scales during JJA
and SON due to analogous scales in the humidity patterns.

Unauthenticated | Downloaded 04/25/24 05:56 PM UTC

3388

JOURNAL OF CLIMATE

VOLUME 19

FIG. 7. Seasonal variation of the spatial decorrelation scales (in kilometers) for the latent heat flux in (a) DJF, (b) MAM, (c) JJA,
and (d) SON.

scales (in the zonal and meridional directions) are
also computed for spatial lags of 1° latitude/
longitude up to the basin scale. The empty points
(over land and/or due to satellite coverage) are not
included in this calculation.
2) For each missing value we locate the two nearest
existing neighbors upstream and downstream (in
space or in time). We examine one direction at a
time (zonally, meridionally, or in time). We only
take into account points that fall within the decorrelation scale along this direction and estimate the
distance from the missing value point. If no upstream or downstream neighbors exist (as in starting/ending points or near land boundaries) we assume that the weights in the regression function are
zero (see below).
3) We compute the weights in the interpolation
scheme. If ⌬x, ⌬y, and ⌬t are the decorrelation
scales along the zonal, meridional, and temporal directions, respectively, the weights of the nearest upstream and downstream existing neighbors are
wi ⫽ 1 ⫺

␦i
共⌬t, ⌬x, ⌬y兲

,

i ⫽ 1, . . . , 6,

共4兲

where ␦i is the time period or the distance between
the point to be filled and its nearest upstream and

downstream neighbors. To maintain physical meaning and conserve quantities, weights must be between 0, for points that lie beyond one decorrelation
scale away, and 1, for points that lie at a distance
much smaller than the decorrelation scale (␦i ⬃ ⌬x;
i.e., ⌬x → ⬁). Then, the flux at the missing point is
6

FO共x, y, t兲 ⫽

冒

6

兺 w F 共x, y, t兲 兺 w .
i i

i⫽1

i

共5兲

i⫽1

Missing values on land or from already-filled points
are not included in the computation of the flux at
other points.
The advantage of the present method is that we use
the same dataset to extract information about variability (i.e., decorrelation scales) independent of the number of gaps (as long as it is not too large compared to
the number of existing points and the record is long
enough) and use it to fill in the missing values. Therefore the dataset is not altered by inclusion of external
information.
A measure of the effectiveness of the method is illustrated by Fig. 8. After year 1991, about 99% of the
missing values in the original dataset are filled. During
the years 1989 and 1990 particularly low coverage from
the satellites results in several points left unfilled since

Unauthenticated | Downloaded 04/25/24 05:56 PM UTC

15 JULY 2006

3389

ROMANOU ET AL.

FIG. 8. Percentage of initially missing values that are
successfully filled. Land-missing points are not counted.

there is no information within the decorrelation scales.
Such points may be eventually filled using linear time
interpolation.
To evaluate the method described here we used three
different datasets with no missing values: a reanalysis
dataset (NCEP SST for year 1992), the ISCCP-FD
downward shortwave radiative flux at the surface for
1992 (1° resolution, 3 hourly; Zhang et al. 2004), and
the GPCP precipitation for 1999 (1° resolution, daily;
Huffman et al. 1997). In all three cases, we simulated
the distribution of the gaps in GSSTF2 by omitting values at the same times/locations as in GSSTF2. Then we
then computed the decorrelation scales for each dataset
and used the decorrelation method to fill in the “missing” values. We then proceeded to compare the “filled”
product with the initial (no missing values) products.
The three datasets chosen describe variables/fluxes that
contain a very wide range of frequencies; therefore the
decorrelation-based filling method can be evaluated on
many frequency regimes.
Figure 9 shows the root-mean-square bias between
the filled and the original fields, and it is reported only
for the filled points. The bias between the original
NCEP SST and the artificially filled one (Fig. 9a) is at
most 1.2°C in very few areas (Japan Sea) and up to
0.4°C in some areas, mostly in the Southern Hemisphere. These are areas where the decorrelation scales
are very small, the conditions are highly variable, and
hence the interpolation scheme is not as accurate. Seventy percent of all points have biases within 0°–0.2°C.
The rms bias between the original ISCCP-FD dataset
and the artificially filled one is shown in Fig. 9b. Seventy percent of all the points have biases up to 10 W
m⫺2. The greatest bias corresponds to regions again

where the decorrelation scales are short, such as in the
equatorial regions off Indonesia and in the Bay of Bengal. Figure 9c shows the rms bias in the precipitation
rates between the original GPCP product and the artificially filled one. Seventy percent of all the points have
biases up to 1.5 mm day⫺1. Here, the largest biases
correspond to regions of longest decorrelation scales,
that is, lower frequency variability.
The method preserves adequately the gradients of
the fields as summarized in Table 2. The maximum
difference in the horizontal gradient is 0.4°C(° lon)⫺1 between the original and the filled SST, 6 W m⫺2(° lon)⫺1
between the original and the filled radiation flux, and
0.6 mm day⫺1(° lon)⫺1 between the original and the
filled precipitation data. Figure 10 shows the spectrum
in the temporal gradient of the original and the filled,
globally averaged, time series. The shape of the spectrum is captured well for all three fields. The NCEP
SST higher frequencies have more power in the filled
version of the dataset, which implies that the voids
filled were in regions of higher variability (shorter
decorrelation scales). The ISCCP-FD and the GPCP
spectral densities are slightly overestimated in the filled
versions, which is attributed to the fact that the voids
were in regions of both higher and lower variability.

5. Summary and conclusions
In the present paper, we looked at the decorrelation
scales of the ocean surface turbulence fields, the latent
and sensible heat fluxes, the wind stress, air–sea humidity difference, and SST from the GSSTF2 and NCEP–
NCAR reanalysis datasets. The decorrelation scales
represent the temporal scales and the spatial patterns
that dominate in the air–sea interaction and are the
scales at which the lower atmosphere and the ocean are
forced. The frequency regime examined in this paper
spans a few days up to a year and the spatial scales span
1° latitude/longitude up to basin scale. Since the methodology establishes a spectral bandpass between two
days and either one season or one year, the dominant
signal is within this pass-band frequency window.
The dataset we used was the SSM/I retrieved
GSSTF2 dataset with near-global coverage at daily and
1° latitude/longitude resolution, which provided the opportunity to construct geographical maps of spatial and
temporal variability scales. By relating flux variation
scales with the variability scales of the input physical
parameters, we were able to suggest the primary
mechanisms influencing latent heat release and sensible
heat fluxes regionally.
Higher frequency variability and smaller spatial patterns dominate in the Southern Hemisphere compared

Unauthenticated | Downloaded 04/25/24 05:56 PM UTC

3390

JOURNAL OF CLIMATE

VOLUME 19

FIG. 9. Percentage of points with rms bias within a certain
range. Only the initially missing values are considered. The horizontal axis is (a) the temperature range (°C) in the filled vs the
original NCEP SST for year 1992, (b) the radiation range (W
m⫺2) in the filled vs the original ISCCP-FD downward surface
radiation flux for year 1992, and (c) the precipitation range (mm
yr⫺1) in the filled vs the original GPCP precipitation rates for
year 1992.

to the Northern Hemisphere owing to the unequal
land–ocean distribution in the two hemispheres.
In the equatorial regions temporal and spatial variability in latent and sensible heat fluxes comes from the
trade winds in agreement with Liu et al. (1994). In the
western Pacific warm pool, variability in the trade
winds and the humidity differences associated with the
MJO produces similar variability in both fluxes.
TABLE 2. Difference between the gradient of the original annual mean field and the filled one. Here, swd stands for surface
downward shortwave radiation.
Absolute gradient difference

NCEP SST
ISCCP-swd
GPCP

Meridional

Zonal

⬍0.4°C(° lat)⫺1
⬍4 W m⫺2(° lat)⫺1
⬍0.2 mm day⫺1(° lat)⫺1

⬍0.2°C(° lon)⫺1
⬍6 W m⫺2(° lon)⫺1
⬍0.6 mm day⫺1(° lon)⫺1

In areas where marine stratocumulus clouds are persistent, as in the Congo outflow region and in the eastern equatorial Pacific, the changes of humidity between
the air and sea are the main mechanism causing evaporation variability. In the equatorial Atlantic, zonal wind
and SST determine the variability in the sensible heat
flux.
In the sensible heat flux signal, longer time scales
near coasts are associated with persistence of meridional winds and the ensuing coastal upwelling, which
imprints longer scales on SST as well.
Along the storm track regions in the northwest Atlantic and northwest Pacific Oceans, intensive cooling
due to cold air blowing over a warm ocean imposes
lower frequency variability that is explained by the
thermal inertia of the ocean. Long scales are then found
in the latent and sensible heat fluxes there and are attributed to humidity and temperature differences be-

Unauthenticated | Downloaded 04/25/24 05:56 PM UTC

15 JULY 2006

ROMANOU ET AL.

3391

FIG. 10. Spectral densities of the temporal gradient of the original (darker line) and the filled (thin line) time series. (a) NCEP
SST, (b) ISCCP-FD shortwave downward radiation, and (c)
GPCP datasets. For each plot the temporal gradient of the time
series of the globally averaged quantity is produced first, and the
power spectral density of this time series is then computed. The
units of the vertical axis are (time series units/day)2/(2 days) and
the vertical axis units are (2 days)⫺1.

tween the sea and the air above rather than variability
due to winds.
Low frequency variability of the order of 40–60 days
near the Amsterdam Islands in the south Indian Ocean
is associated with analogous variability in the zonal
winds.
However, in some regions, such as the Arabian Sea
and the Bay of Bengal, the low frequency variations in
both the wind and humidity differences are not consistent with much shorter scale variability in the latent
heat flux. There, nearly opposite phases of low frequency variability in wind and humidity cancel each
other, leaving higher frequencies to dominate the latent
heat flux.
The spatial variability in the latent and sensible heat
fluxes is anisotropic, being more consistent in the zonal

than meridional direction, particularly during DJF and
JJA. The trade winds belt exhibits the largest coherence, while at higher latitudes the coherence is reduced
owing to the smaller ocean basins. Smaller spatial patterns are found in the storm track regions and in the
Southern Ocean. Sensible heat spatial patterns have
larger scales than latent heat, implying that sensible
heat flux is dominated by the SST patterns. This may be
exaggerated by the spurious smoothness of the NCEP–
NCAR product.
In the Niño-3 region, temporal-scale changes in the
air–sea humidity difference and the SST are highly correlated with the El Niño and La Niña cycles. Typically,
during El Niño (La Niña) years, higher (lower) frequency variability dominates in these fields and is of the
order of 30–40 days (50–80 days). This variability is

Unauthenticated | Downloaded 04/25/24 05:56 PM UTC

3392

JOURNAL OF CLIMATE

found at the lower (upper) limit of the MJO frequency
range. Sensible heat flux, zonal wind, and to a lesser
degree evaporation scales differ from one El Niño to
the next.
In the second part of the paper, we used the decorrelation scales computed for each flux field to interpolate the gaps that resulted from incomplete satellite
coverage. The information used to fill in the gaps is
based on the temporal as well as spatial evolution of
flux features. A similar technique was proposed by
Polito et al. (2000) to fill in gaps in NASA Scatterometer (NSCAT) winds. However, they restricted their
method to lags of 3°–4° and 2 days long.
The advantage of the present method is that only
internal information from the dataset is utilized to fill in
missing values and, although it is a simple approach, it
keeps computational cost related to decorrelation
evaluations small and, since it is based on the observed
spatial and temporal patterns, it is easily validated.
Acknowledgments. The study was carried out under
NASA Grant 1218935. We wish to thank Dr. Eric Nelkin for providing the GSSTF2 and NCEP datasets;
Ralph Karow, Cindy Pearl, and Violeta Golea for assistance with the computing facilities; and Dr. George
Tselioudis for useful discussions.

REFERENCES
Adler, R. F., and Coauthors, 2003: The Version-2 Global Precipitation Climatology Project (GPCP) monthly precipitation
analysis (1979–present). J. Hydrometeor., 4, 1147–1167.
Alexander, M. A., M. S. Timlin, and J. D. Scott, 2001: Winter-towinter recurrence of sea surface temperature, salinity and
mixed layer depth anomalies. Progress in Oceanography,
Vol. 49, Pergamon, 41–61.
Atlas, R., R. N. Hoffman, S. C. Bloom, J. C. Jusem, and J. Ardizzone, 1996: A multiyear global surface wind velocity dataset
using SSM/I wind observations. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 77,
869–882.
Barnston, A. G., 1996: Time-scales of the variability of the atmosphere. Int. J. Climatol., 16, 499–535.
Borzelli, G., and R. Ligi, 1999: Autocorrelation scales of the SST
distribution and water masses stratification in the Channel of
Sicily. J. Atmos. Oceanic Technol., 16, 776–781.
Chelton, D. B., and Coauthors, 2001: Observations of coupling
between surface wind stress and sea surface temperature in
the eastern tropical Pacific. J. Climate, 14, 1479–1498.
Chou, S.-H., 1993: A comparison of airborne eddy correlation and
bulk aerodynamic methods for ocean-air turbulent fluxes
during cold-air outbreaks. Bound.-Layer Meteor., 64, 75–100.
——, R. M. Atlas, C.-L. Shie, and J. Ardizzone, 1995: Estimates of
surface humidity and latent heat fluxes over oceans from
SSM/I data. Mon. Wea. Rev., 123, 2405–2425.
——, C.-L. Shie, R. M. Atlas, and J. Ardizzone, 1997: Air-sea

VOLUME 19

fluxes retrieved from special sensor microwave imager data.
J. Geophys. Res., 102, 12 705–12 726.
——, E. Nelkin, J. Ardizzone, R. M. Atlas, and C.-L. Shie, 2003:
Surface turbulent heat and momentum fluxes over global
oceans based on the Goddard satellite retrievals, version 2
(GSSTF2). J. Climate, 16, 3256–3273.
——, ——, ——, and ——, 2004: A comparison of latent heat
fluxes over global oceans for four flux products. J. Climate,
17, 3973–3988.
Chu, P. C., G. H. Wang, and Y. C. Chen, 2002: Japan Sea thermohaline structure and circulation. Part III: Autocorrelation
functions. J. Phys. Oceanogr., 32, 3596–3615.
Curry, J. A., and Coauthors, 2004: SEAFLUX. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 85, 409–424.
Huffman, G. J., R. F. Adler, A. Chang, R. Ferraro, A. Gruber, A.
McNab, B. Rudolf, and U. Schneider, 1997: The Global Precipitation Climatology Project (GPCP) combined precipitation data set. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 78, 5–20.
Ikeda, M., 1993: Mesoscale variabilities and Gulf-Stream bifurcation in the Newfoundland Basin observed by the GEOSAT
altimeter data. Atmos.–Ocean, 31, 567–589.
Kalnay, E., and Coauthors, 1996: The NCEP/NCAR 40-Year Reanalysis Project. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 77, 437–471.
Kessler, W. S., M. C. Spillane, M. J. McPhaden, and D. E. Harrison, 1996: Scales of variability in the equatorial Pacific inferred from the tropical atmosphere–ocean buoy array. J.
Climate, 9, 2999–3024.
Lagerloef, G., and T. Delcroix, 1999: Sea surface salinity observations for tropical Pacific. CLIVAR Exchanges, Vol. 4, No.
3, International CLIVAR Project Office, Southampton,
United Kingdom, 5–10.
Liu, W. T., A. Zhang, and J. K. B. Bishop, 1994: Evaporation and
solar irradiances as regulators of sea surface temperatures in
annual and interannual changes. J. Geophys. Res., 99 (C6),
12 623–12 637.
McPhaden, M. J., 1999: Genesis and evolution of the 1997–98 El
Niño. Science, 283, 950–954.
Molinari, R. L., and J. F. Festa, 2000: Effect of subjective choices
on the objective analysis of sea surface temperature data in
the tropical Atlantic and Pacific ocean. Oceanol. Acta, 23,
3–14.
Polito, P. S., and O. T. Sato, 2003: Patterns of sea surface height
and heat storage associated to intraseasonal Rossby waves
in the tropics. J. Geophys. Res., 108, 3373, doi:10.1029/
2002JC001684.
——, W. T. Liu, and W. Tang, 2000: Correlation-based interpolation of NSCAT wind data. J. Atmos. Oceanic Technol., 17,
1128–1138.
Rossow, W. B., and R. A. Schiffer, 1999: Advances in understanding clouds from ISCCP. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 80, 2261–
2288.
Schulz, J., P. Schluessel, and H. Grassl, 1993: Water vapor in the
atmospheric boundary layer over oceans from SSM/I measurements. Int. J. Remote Sens., 14, 2773–2789.
Sprintall, J., and G. Meyers, 1991: An optimal XBT sampling
network for the eastern Pacific Ocean. J. Geophys. Res., 96
(C6), 10 539–10 552.
Takayabu, Y. N., T. Iguchi, M. Kachi, A. Shibata, and H. Kanzawa, 1999: Abrupt termination of the 1997–98 El Niño in

Unauthenticated | Downloaded 04/25/24 05:56 PM UTC

15 JULY 2006

ROMANOU ET AL.

response to a Madden-Julian Oscillation. Nature, 402, 279–
282.
Tanaka, M., 1997: Interannual and interdecadal variations of the
western North Pacific Monsoon and Baiu rainfall and their
relationship to the ENSO cycles. J. Meteor. Soc. Japan, 75,
1109–1123.
von Storch, H., and F. W. Zwiers, 1999: Statistical Analysis in
Climate Research. Cambridge University Press, 484 pp.

3393

Wentz, F. J., 1997: A well calibrated ocean algorithm for SSM/I. J.
Geophys. Res., 102, 8703–8718.
Zhang, Y., W. B. Rossow, A. A. Lacis, V. Oinas, and M. I. Mishchenko, 2004: Calculation of radiative fluxes from the surface
to top of atmosphere based on ISCCP and other global data
sets: Refinements of the radiative transfer model and the
input data. J. Geophys. Res., 109, D19105, doi:10.1029/
2003JD004457.

Unauthenticated | Downloaded 04/25/24 05:56 PM UTC

